Asbestos house dwellers of the South mobilise at Plaine Magnien CAB
21.08.2019
This morning, some 30 asbestos house inhabitants gathered at Plaine Magnien Citizen's Advice Bureau together with LALIT militants. They were there to demand that Housing Minister Mahen Jhugroo who is also the MP for the Mahebourg-Plaine Magnien constituency come up with a plan for reconstruction of asbestos houses with a time-frame included. Three delegates, two of them present in the gathering had presented a letter to the Housing Minister through his press attaché at the Housing Ministry in Ebene two weeks ago to call on MP Jhugroo, as Housing Minister, to come up with such a plan. “Where is his reply?” they asked. “We have been waiting since 2015”. Mr. Aubeeluck, a CAB co-ordinator there, took note of the arguments and demands of the gathering and said he would contact Minister Jhugroo to arrange a meeting.In the gathering, people listened attentively to the report back of asbestos-inhabitants/LALIT militants of the North gathered in Pamplemousses CAB in a similar action on a mobile speaker.You can read the letter to Housing Minister Jhugroo on our news section: https://www.lalitmauritius.org/en/newsarticle/2292/housing-minister-jhugroos-volt-fas/
This morning, some 30 asbestos house inhabitants gathered at Plaine Magnien Citizen's Advice Bureau together with LALIT militants. They were there to demand that Housing Minister Mahen Jhugroo who is also the MP for the Mahebourg-Plaine Magnien constituency come up with a plan for reconstruction of asbestos houses with a time-frame included. Three delegates, two of them present in the gathering had presented a letter to the Housing Minister through his press attaché at the Housing Ministry in Ebene two weeks ago to call on MP Jhugroo, as Housing Minister, to come up with such a plan. 
“Where is his reply?” they asked. “We have been waiting since 2015”. Mr. Aubeeluck, a CAB co-ordinator there, took note of the arguments and demands of the gathering and said he would contact Minister Jhugroo to arrange a meeting.
In the gathering, people listened attentively to the report back of asbestos-inhabitants/LALIT militants of the North gathered in Pamplemousses CAB in a similar action on a mobile speaker.
You can read the letter to Housing Minister Jhugroo on our news section: 
https://www.lalitmauritius.org/en/newsarticle/2292/housing-minister-jhugroos-volt-fas/

