Chief Inspector Raddhoa found guilty of human rights abuse, reinstated by Ramgoolam government
09.08.2005
Chief Inspector Raddhoa who was transferred to SMF garage after public outcry against his human rights abuses against detainees, has been reinstated by the Social Alliance government to his previous post in Curepipe. The press has reported that he will head a new "unit". By reinstating CI Raddhoa, the  Ramgoolam government is giving a dangerous signal to Police: the government is stating quite clearly that no sanctions will be taken against police officers guilty of human rights abuse. Both the Intermediary Court and the National Human Rights Commission have ruled that Chief Inspector Raddhoa has committed serious human rights abuse.An Intermediary Court judgement of Magistrate Benjamin Marie Joseph in May this year ruled that Chief Inspector Raddhoa and his men had beaten up a detainee, Mr. Richard Larhubarbe. Chief Inspector Raddhoa and his men had already been found guilty of human rights abuse by the National Human Rights Commission in March 2002 in the case of Mrs Martine Desmarais when she was forcibly taken from her home in Pereybere, sequestrated and taken to Albion in a police van. Mrs. Desmarais was a witness in the case of Bernard Maigrot. The NHRC recommended to the DPP that Chief Inspector Raddhoa and his men, officers Fareedhun, Raimbert and Dookhoony be prosecuted. Up to now, no prosecutions have ensued.Chief Inspector Raddhoa's human rights abuse is so well-known that in March this year, a UN Human Rights Committee member in a formal session, asked Assistant Sollicitor General Satyajit Boolell representing the State of Mauritius why CI Raddhoa had been given a State award when the NHRC had found him guilty of violation of fundamental civil rights of Mrs Desmarais. In their Concluding Observations in March this year, the UN Human Rights Committee gave the State of Mauritius 1 year to report on what sanctions have been taken on police officers guilty of human rights abuse. Attorney General Valayden will be hard put to explain to the Committee why CI Raddhoa has been reinstated.

