Death of Kaya in Police Custody: widow of late Kaya  calls on PM to table Magistrate Kam Sing  findings on the death of Kaya in custody
28.06.2003
Camp Bengalis (near Kalimaye),Beau SongesBambous18th June, 2003Hon Sir Aneerood JugnauthPrime MinisterGovernment HousePort LouisDear Sir, As it nears the end of your term as Prime Minister, I find myself again needing to write a formal letter to you to request that you use your good offices to help me out of an impasse. As you are aware, I am the widow of the late Kaya, Reginald Topize, who was found dead in mysterious circumstances on 21st February, 1999 after having been taken from our house in Beau Songes in good health on 18th February, 1999.You will recall that in September, 2000 I wrote to you, mentioning the interest I had taken during the electoral campaign that you and your party had said you were prepared, if necessary to re-open an Inquiry. This may still become necessary. Just for the record, last time I wrote was to request that the State take on the onerous responsibility of additional pathological examinations of the brain of my late husband. The results of these examinations, which the State on your advice, did get done by Dr. Graham concluded, amongst other things and as I expected it to, that my husband did not die a natural death, and that his brain showed no signs of the effects of alcohol or drug abuse.Recently, the daily newspaper L’Express has published an article that purports to have it on authority that the Findings of the Judicial Inquiry conducted by Magistrate Kam Sing are now complete. The article also says that the Magistrate finds that there is no foul play.My advocate, Mr. Rex Stephen, immediately wrote to the DPP to request confirmation of this information in the Press and to request that I be given a copy, should it be true. We have had not reply.I write to you now to request that, in the public interest and because the death of my husband caused such anger and an uprising against the Police on 21st and 22nd February, 1999, that the Magistrate’s Findings be tabled at the National Assembly, and thus be made public. I believe that all such findings should be made public, and be given to the next of kin. But in the case of the death of Kaya, there is the additional factor of the reasons for his death being of compelling “public interest.’This way, should the findings once made public in fact turn out to be both reasonable and well-substantiated, we may be able to avoid considering re-opening a new Inquiry.Thank you once again for considering this request.Yours sincerely,Veronique Topize.

