LALIT and four organisations request details on procedure to visit Diego Garcia
07.09.2012
LALIT together with Groupement Unitaire de Baie du Tombeau, Confederation des Travailleurs du Secteur Prive, Muvman Liberasyon Fam and Elan sent a letter to Minister Hervé Aimée, requesting him to clarify  what are the formalities  needed for inhabitants of the island of Mauritius wishing to visit Diego Garcia. We are hereunder publishing the letter which was sent on Monday 3rd September 2012.To: Hon. Hervé Aimée,Minister of Local Government and Outer Islands,Level 6, Renganaden Seeneevassen Bldg,Cnr Jules Koenig & Maillard Streets, Port Louis.3 September 2012.Dear Sir,We, the undersigned, write to you as Minister responsible for all Outer Islands of the Republic of Mauritius. These Outer Islands, as you are aware, are specified under  section 111 of our Constitution, in the following sentence: . ‘Mauritius. includes the islands of Mauritius, Rodrigues, Agalega, Tromelin, Cargados Carajos and the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia and any other island comprised in the State of Mauritius’.  As inhabitants, at present, of the Island of Mauritius we, the undersigned, would like to make a formal request to you as to the procedure we need to follow in order to visit the part of our country called Chagos, in particular Diego Garcia. Are there any formalities we have to undertake, relative to your Ministry, in order to travel to any island of the Chagos Archipelago? We know how to visit Rodrigues, Agalega, Ile aux Cerfs or how to do some camping on Ile de la Passe, but we are not sure if there is any specific official formality we have to fill in at your Ministry for our planned visit to the Chagos. Furthermore, the newly voted .Local Government Act .has rightly re-confirmed, if need be, Mauritian sovereignty on the Chagos Archipelago, in affirming your power as Minister in charge of all local authorities to establish regional bodies in all islands of the Republic of Mauritius including the Chagos. The Local Government Act 2011Sub-Part B – Village Committees of Agaléga and Other Parts of Mauritius10. Village Committee(1) In Agaléga, Tromelin, Cargados Carajos and the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego Garcia, and any other island comprised in the State of Mauritius, the appropriate regional body may, in accordance with such guidelines as may be issued by the Minister, and notwithstanding any enactment or rules establishing the regional body, set up Village Committees in the localities under its jurisdiction.In conclusion, we are addressing you this letter in the hope that you and your Ministry can enlighten us, in writing if possible, on this question. Yours faithfullyJean Akin Felicite, for Groupement Unitaire de Baie du TombeauAnand Purahoo, for Confederation des Travailleurs du Secteur PriveRajni Lallah, for Muvman Liberasyon FamLyndsay Aza, for ElanAlain Ah-Vee, for LALITTEL:  208 5551 or 208 2132; c/o LALIT, 153 Main Rd, GRNW, Port Louis.Copy to the Press

