LALIT’s two-day Political Education Sessions for Cadres
05.08.2013
Saturday and Sunday, 27 and 28 July, saw 25 people participating in different sessions of a “Lekol de Kad” or political education sessions for cadres. Saturday Morning had three sessions. The first was by Alain Ah-Vee on “What is LALIT?” He spoke not only on what LALIT is, but on how LALIT differs from other political parties, and on the necessity for proper organization, if we want to actually change the world. There are 10 short audio-gems on the “audio” section of this web-site taken from his talk. Just click on Audio and scroll down to the first one.The second session by Rada Kistnasamy and Kistna Kisnasamy was about how to use search engines, starting with how to surf on the www.lalitmauritius.org site itself, but also how to access political information, from a political activist’s point of view, in more general terms.The third session by barrister, Jean-Claude Bibi was on “The Citizen and the Law”, in which he said how the concept of the “citizen” is itself a flawed one, masking the inequalities between a working person and someone who controls the economy both supposedly being “equal citizens”. And he then went on to the question of how “the law” is not the answer to political problems like class inequality, as the exiswting “ law” itself represents the interests, in the final analysis, of the ruling class who put it there in the first place.The afternoon session, by Cindy Clelie and Lindsey Collen was on practical political work: the art and craft of pasting up posters (including a live session near the LALIT headquarters), and the dynamics of preparing, drafting, and then signing up a petition. There were also examples of what not to do in poster-pasting and in petition-signing up, in order to gain long-term credibility.Sunday’s session by Ram Seegobin was about the new labour laws that workers are having to face up to, and if and how the trade unions are coping with this new framework. There was an extended, lively “question and answer” session that led into open debate.The schools ended with people giving an evaluation of the session/s they had participated in, and saying how they would continue their political contribution in LALIT. There was a demand for an ongoing “political education” school. The LALIT “study group” on Marxist thinking has recruited some new people through the cadre school.

