LALIT member Lindsey Collen gives LALIT’s position against bombing of Libya
22.03.2011
LALIT member, Lindsey Collen, on Radio Plus Monday 21 March 2011said that LALIT opposed the bombardment of Libya, calling it an“imperialist military intervention”.She was invited by NawaazNoorbux, together with Reza Issac from the Labour Party, SteeveObeegadoo from the MMM, and former vice-president of the Republic andfounder of the Libya-Mauritius Friendship Society, Raouf Bhundun. Theprogram, Gran Zurnal was just over an hour and it was on the US-led, French-egged on, bombardment of Libya. LindseyCollen, during the program, said that there were three differentbackgrounds that needed to be kept in mind if the bombardment was to becorrectly judged. First, the whole of North Africa and the Arabworld has been in a state of mass uprising for some months now, and theUSA and the West in general feels it is losing control over the area,having already lost some of its most powerful puppets in the area. Thismeans the West has a vested interest in getting a toe-hold on a countrythat, geographically speaking, falls between Egypt and Tunisia. This isperhaps the main motivation for US to intervene. Second, ithas been established beyond all doubt that the political build-upconcocted by Blair and Bush in the media prior to the invasion of Iraqwas a web of lies, and there were never any Weapons of MassDestruction. The case on that, she said, is closed. It was aconstruction of lies. We should not allow ourselves to be duped asecond time, if we were duped the first. The reasons for thebombardment once again just do not hold up, she said. There would havebeen many more reasons to intervene in order to make Israel respect UNresolutions. Whereas, the bombing of Gaza went ahead without anycoalition getting itself off the ground. Third, she said thatthere was an element of panic-intervention, which may be partlyexplained by the effects on Europe of the Japanese nuclear melt-downthreat, after the earthquake and tsunami, which in turn relates to theenergy crisis, when countries that are heavily reliant on nuclear powernow face populations against nuclear energy. This, bearing in mind, shesaid that Libya has Africa’s largest oil reserves. And that it ishighly refined. France, she said, may be motivated by its dependencefor 16% of its crude oil on this highly refined Libyan Oil.Shealso said, during the Program, that the political and militarychallenge to the dictatorial regime of Libya was different from themass uprisings in Egypt, around Tahir Square, and in Tunisia againstthe US puppets in power there. We have seen on television how differentthey are, she said. If, at the beginning there were some demonstrationsin Libya against the Muammar Gaddafi regime, as soon as the US and NATOstarted to talk about military interventions, the protestors sharplydecreased in numbers, realizing accurately that oppression by imperialpowers would be even harder to get rid of than oppression by Gaddafi.What seems to be left are armed factions. She said she could understandthis, because if in LALIT, we were part of an uprising against the MSM,MMM or Labour one day, if the US and Britain threatened to intervene toget them ousted, we would also step back.She said that LALIT hadalways been critical of the Gaddafi regime, when so many others, bethey MMM, the socalled “Lel Gos” of the MMM, or Labour party people whotook him for a hero. LALIT had always sharply criticized the idea of a“leader” or “guide” like Gaddafi and then “the people” left as anamorphous group, without any party structures or internal democracy.Nawaaz Noorbux then said this was “direct democracy”, to which LindseyCollen said “supposedly”. This constant criticism of Gaddafi isrelevant, because quite a few of those criticizing Gadaafi in order tocollude with the bombardment are from currents that hero-worshippedGaddafi in the past, when he always was a populist with dictatorialleanings. Other points brought up by the LALIT member werethat the cobbled together coalition of Western military powers is verywobbly, and that this is dangerous. The US cannot be subordinate to anyother military leader, for Constitutional reasons, and is the only onewith the hardware for the initial bombings anyway, so leads. But the USis not too keen, and has announced its intention to pull out in favourof either NATO or some British-French coalition. The French Persident,Sarkozy is the one who was champing at the bit for bombarding, shesaid. He and Cameron obviously see some short-term political“popularity” from whipping up macho nationalism. But Obama hasdifficulties because he is saying “Gaddafi must go”, while his topmilitary brass say this is not their war aim, and that they are only to“ensure a no fly zone”. She also said that Obama was in minority in theHouse of Representatives and would be criticized for confusion aboutwar aims in the House if he was not careful. She said that for200 years in Western thinking, though perhaps nearer 2000 in both Indiaand China, there were principles of war. The Prussian strategist, Carlvon Clauswitz, she said pointed out that war, if it is not to bringabout disorder and defeat, has to have clearly understood aims and besupported by what he called a “trinity” of the people, the militarychiefs and the political leaders. In the case of the invasion of Libya,the people do not know why, the political chiefs all have their owninterpretations of the UN resolution, and the military chief differentinterpretations. This kind of confusion will bring terrible suffering.Just as in Iraq, the West has directly caused, by its sanctions andintervention, between 150,000 and one million deaths. Bycontrast, she said that, contrary to what Raouf Bhundun had said, therewas a new leadership emerging during the uprisings in other countries.It is not just a “vacuum”. She said that in Tunisia the uprising hadalready won a “constituent assembly” which will be elected in order todraft a new constitution, and the degree of increased democracy thatwill be in it, will depend on the degree of popular mobilization. Shesaid that the people in the Middle East were demanding more liberty andjustice and democracy than other countries, notably in the West, have.Onthe question of Libya, she also said that when the BRIC (Brazil,Russia, India, China) countries abstain at the Security Council, thishas great significance, because it means they do not agree to the war.They represent 40% of the World’s population. The African Union is notin favour of the bombing either, and Libya is an African country. Nowthe Arab League is fortunately beginning to distance itself from thebombardment. What the Arab League thought a No Fly Zone meant, shesaid, makes the mind boggle. They obviously thought it was someabstract,geometrical idea. And they have seen the 12 year No Fly Zonein Irak. Even Germany abstained. What this means is that it is a veryweak coalition.Lindsey Collen, when asked what would happennow, said that she would not put it past the Western allies to try toassassinate Gaddafi, though this was an illegal, immoral andunthinkable war aim. That would mean a weakening of his camp. Or, itmay be a long drawn out battle. Already it is not just air-missiles,and airports being aimed at, but political headquarters and a road oftanks. So, soon there will be pressure to have ground troops, and toinvade without calling it “an occupation”. She quoted Liam Fox, DefenseSecretary in the UK already making a distinction between invading andoccupying. It looks as though there is disorder ahead, she said.Theother three speakers were, at the beginning of the program, all infavour of the military intervention. Steve Obeegadoo, however, calledfor “ceasefire”, and insisted upon “seeing both sides of the story”. Atone point, Lindsey Collen asked him who it was he was referring to asbeing “in favour of Gaddafi”, and he said one listener had, during theprogram, phoned in and during his intervention he had indeed, if as amanner of speaking said “whether a Government is attacking its peopleis not our problem”. So, it was never clear what he meant by “fer laparde soz”. Almost all those who phoned in were furious about thebombardment, and almost all compared it to the utter carelessness forthe Palestinian people, and for those who suffered the blocade andbombing in Gaza.By the end of the program, after Lindsey Collen’sclear explanations and after all the listeners’ views, the other threespeakers had become a bit more critical, it seemed, of the bombardment,and were referring to the tragedy of Iraq as if in comparison. 

