Lalit  in hot political debates on Radios
22.02.2004
Lalit spokespersons are more and more called to participate in the current political debates. Ram Seegobin, spokesperson of Lalit, was live on Top FM Radio last Monday 16th of February, in the Hard Talk program debating the rise of communalism in Mauritius. He defended the concept of a secular state and re-affirmed Lalit stand against all form of communal classification and categorization of Mauritian citizens. He explained how Lalit candidates in general elections refuse to classify themselves and instead draw lots to put the "community", which is compulsory under the law, on their nomination paper. Talking on the dangerous communal dynamics sparkled by the debates on 50% reserved seats in Catholics School and the inclusion of oriental languages for the CPE exams, he reminded that Lalit described in 1995 the "communal troc" represented by the two Select Committees Reports as a "bomb kominal avek 2 lames". "Unfortunately recent events are confirming this 1995 Lalit assessment," he concluded.  On Thursday 19th February, Ashok Subron, another spokesperson of Lalit was live on Radio Plus in the Grand Journal as the guest of Jimmy J. Louis, replying to questions on the Electoral Reform and commenting on the Collendavelloo Select Committee Report. Ashok Subron said that the aim of any real electoral reform in Mauritius should be to increase democracy to confer more power to the citizens, to eliminate the communal "best-loser system" and to ensure that all political opinions and ideas are represented in the National Assembly. He said that the whole project of electoral reform have been jeopardized because of the manipulation of the Sachs Commission by the MSM-MMM government. The Collendavelloo report is just the extension of this manipulation. He presented Lalit proposal for a 75 members National Assembly - 63 elected by the first past the post system and an additional 12 to be nominated to represent different political current, while eliminating the current communal best loser system. Lalit papers submitted to the Sachs Commission on Electoral Reform can be accessed by browsing the Documents section of our website.  

