LALIT challenges Government on Diego Garcia strategy
29.03.2011
LALIT challenged the Prime Minister, Hon Dr. Navin Ramgoolam, in aletter yesterday to make the Government’s strategy on Diego Garcia andChagos public. LALIT also called for a Mauritian-sponsored UN GeneralAssembly Resolution on the issue to respect the dead-line for the nextsession. Given the nuclear disaster unfolding in Japan, LALIT alsocalled on Government to make public the time-line for putting in arequest for UN inspections under the new Pelindaba Treaty body, theAfrica Commission on Nuclear Energy. Here is the content of the letter.27 March, 2011Dear Sir,Wewrite to you because we understand that there is now a “task force”under the auspices of the Prime Minister’s Office and that is in chargeof the strategy the State of Mauritius is adopting on the issue ofDiego Garcia and Chagos.We write to request reassurance thatyour Ministry, which runs this “task force” will be submitting a draftresolution to the UN General Assembly, in order to gain politicalsupport for the Mauritian claim of sovereignty and to, at the sametime, by means of this resolution, call for the UN International Courtof Justice at the Hague to consider the matter and come up with anAdvisory Opinion. This will put Mauritius in a strong positionpolitically and legally. We also request reassurance that the deadlinefor resolutions will not be missed. And that, once a resolution is onthe agenda, that it does not subsequently, under pressure from thepowerful nation states that illegally occupy Diego Garcia and Chagos,get withdrawn from the agenda. This has happened, we believe, in thepast.That is our first request. Our second request is that you publicly outline the time-line for putting a complaint under the Pelindaba Treaty for a Nuclear Arms Free Africa nowthat its Committee (Africa Commission on Nuclear Energy) has been setup, and of which Mauritius is a member. The public needs to be informedas to when the AFCONE will come into operation. Now that the tragedy ofthe Fukushima nuclear plant in Japan is becoming evident, it becomesimperative to rid Africa of nuclear weapons. We are aware that threenuclear submarines at the US base at Guam lost their moorings duringthe recent tsunami. The recent Russian exception under Pelindabareminds us how grave it is for us to collude with this military base onour territory. This leads to our third proposal. We believethat in the context of Constitutional Reform, Mauritius should followin the footsteps of countries like Equador who have outlawed allforeign military bases from the soil and waters of their country intheir new Constitution. We support the Government's announcement madelast year that there will be a form of regional assembly for the Chagos.Wewish also, at the same time, to put on record our belief that theGovernment keeping a “secret strategy” runs the high risk of minimizingsupport that the Mauritian State can get, instead of maximizing it.Transparency is what helps to gain support both in Mauritius andabroad. Mauritius has nothing to hide. By contrast, the British Stateand US Administration have every interest in continuing the veil ofsecrecy that they have managed to maintain around Diego Garcia andChagos. We, in LALIT for example, have built up a large network ofpotential support for the triple struggle for complete decolonization(i.e. the reunification of the Republic of Mauritius), base closure(and ecological clean-up and genuine care for the environment), and theright to return with reparations for Chagossians. In particularly, weare in contact with large organizations in both the UK and USA that canbring pressure to bear on their Governments. If the Government’sstrategy remains cloaked in secrecy, we are less able to mobilizesupport.We are following the preparations as they go ahead forthe Mauritian Government’s arbitration under the UNCLOS, and we wish tore-iterate that this tactic, on its own, is risky, and needs to beaccompanied by the UN resolution and the “advisory opinion” at TheHague.Yours sincerely,Lindsey CollenFor LALIT

