LALIT members distribute leaflets on Political Situation in Stations
10.09.2008
LALIT distributed thousands of leaflets this morning in all the main bus stations of the country, that is to say, Victoria Station and Lagar Dinor in Port Louis, Lagar Rose-Hill, La Louise, and Curepipe. (For the content of the leaflets, please see the news items entitled: Nuvo Lalwa Anti-Travyer ek Anti-Sindika, and Ki Aksyon Politik ki Neseser?) These kind of leaflet distributions are a LALIT tradition, and start at just before 6 in the morning. In winter it's still pitch dark. At the bus stations you start to see workers reading the leaflets under street lamps. Others on their way to work stop and take their leaflet from a Lalit member, often asking for "Two more, please!" or "To get one to keep, I need seven!" Lorry drivers stop and hoot for their copies, while motorcyclists and cyclists, slow down and put out a hand for a folded one. Bus conductors open the door and lean out for a copy for themselves and their driver. People who have already got one from another distributer, will smile at you and pull the corner out of their pocket or bag, to show they have one. You never see one on the ground.The idea LALIT has behind this kind of distribution is that the leaflet is read in three places. It will be read when the person is on the way to work, often in work-groups, often read aloud by one worker to others sitting nearby. It will then often be read at tea-time or lunch time, again often in groups that sit in the mess, or under a tree. In both of these places, discussions often take place, and it is in the context of the work-site, where ultimately workers are strongest. And then thirdly, the leaflet will be taken home, where often it is read by spouses and children and grannies and aunts and uncles, too.All the leaflets are distributed before 8 am, when the last of the Lalit distributers rush off to their own place of work.Then, of course, each branch has neighbourhood distribution as well. For today's leaflet, there were hardly any left over for neighbourhood distribution. This was intentional, as there is a possibility of a Cabinet re-shuffle quite soon, and the newsy side of the leaflet may become "stale" quite soon. 

