LALIT  kondann arestasyon ko-fondater ISM dan Gaza
23.12.2008
LALIT pe pibliye enn lartik ki li finn resevwar depi International Solidarity Movement (ISM) konsernan arestasyon Neta Golan, enn sitwayin Israelyin e ko-fondater ISM. ISM enn muvman Palestinyin fonde an Ut 2001 e ki pe reziste lokipasyon ilegal Palestinn par larme Israel. An 2004 ISM ti organiz enn lamars kont miray aparteid dan teritwar okipe, kot ti ena partisipasyon aktivis Palestinyin, Israelyin e volonter Internasyonal. An Ut 2008, Free Gaza Movement dan lekel ena aktivis ISM, ti organiz enn vwayaz bato kot finn reysi kas syez lor Gaza e rant andan Gaza. Depi lerla bann volonter ISM pe akonpayn peser Gaza kan zot al lapes dan dilo teritoryal Palestinyin, pe travay ar fermye ki zot terin truv tutolong 'Green Line' e pe sirkil linformasyon lor lavi abitan Gaza su lokipasyon. 2 militan LALIT Kisna Kistnasamy ek Alain Ah-Vee finn deza partisip dan aksyon ISM e lezot grup Palestinyin dan teritwar okipe an 2004 ek 2007.Lalit kondann arestasyon Neta Golan e sutenir aksyon ki Free Gaza Movement pe amene pu kas syez Gaza e anpes Israel perpepye so pinisyon kolektiv kont abitan Gaza. Bizin kontiyn reziste lokipasyon ilegal ek kolonizasyon Palestinn. Boykot prodwi Israel! Izol Israel!News from ISM Media Group6pm 22nd December 2008 - Neta Golan, an Israeli citizen and co-founder of the International Solidarity Movement (ISM), has been arrested by Israeli police while attempting to leave Gaza through the Erez border crossing.Neta Golan, 38, arrived Gaza on 20th December, along with 17 human rights observers on the SS Dignity, the fifth boat to break the Israeli blockade of Gaza, organised by the Free Gaza Movement.She will be taken to court tomorrow (23rd December) in Kiryat Gat.Neta Golan`s lawyer, Adnan Aladdin, condemned the arrest; "Ms Golan`s actions in no way constitute a crime. Her actions in entering Gaza were acts of necessity based on international law and a rejection of the policies of collective punishment pursued by the Israeli government""Humanitarian needs, such as those faced by the Palestinian people of Gaza due to the Israeli siege, make non-violent acts that are clearly a response to this act of collective punishment necessary. This is common sense and has precedent.""The Defense of Necessity protects those who peacefully seek to prevent gross violations of human rights, grave breaches of humanitarian law, and war crimes from occurring. Non-violent civil disobedience in opposition to and aimed at preventing gross violations of human rights, grave breaches of humanitarian law, and war crimes has been recognized as justified by the necessity of self-defense and the necessity of defense of others in several jurisdictions around the world. (Source - The State of Israel vs.Ascherman, Arik; Omer, Ori; Hamburger, Shai Eliezer, January 2004, Criminal Case  003751/03)Under the Geneva Conventions of 1949, collective punishment is deemed a war crime. Article 33 of the the Fourth Geneva Convention states; "No protected person may be punished for an offense he or she has not personally committed," and that "collective penalties and likewise all measures of intimidation or of terrorism are prohibited." (http:// www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/92.htm).After successfully breaking the blockade with the Free Gaza Movement, Neta Golan spent three days in the Gaza Strip observing the effects of the Israeli siege on Gaza. She visited schools, hospitals and farmers who`s lives have been devastated by Israel`s policies of collective punishment.She stated; "How can an act against the collective punishment of over 1.5 million people be a crime? The policies of the Israeli State towards the people of Gaza is the real crime"."I feel it is my duty to come to Gaza and attempt to raise awareness as to what the Israeli state is doing to the people here. We broke the siege on Gaza, now it is time for more from the international community to do the same in solidarity with the Palestinian people."Neta Golan is one of the co-founders of the International Solidarity Movement which was nominated twice for a Nobel Peace prize. She has actively resisted the occupation, participating in hundreds of demonstrations against the wall and the illegal settler roads. She is married and lives in Ramallah with her Palestinian husband and two children.

