LALIT member Lindsey Collen Refuses Award
04.03.2018
While the Le Defi Media Group announces, in its Le Dimanche Hebdo of 4th March and on-line Le Defi from 3rd March, that the Group gave an Award to 50 people, including LALIT member Lindsey Collen, in their event at the Swami Vivekananda Convention Centre on 3 March 2018 to celebrate 50 years’ Independence, Lindsey Collen had, in fact, refused the Award.So, in the interests of the truth, we are putting this on record. She refused the Award in a letter of 23 February, published below. The two reasons she mentioned were, inter alia, that any contribution she made was not an individual contribution and that her motivation has not been, is not and will not be in order to get such recognition. She had to insist on this refusal, in two telephone calls on 24 February and 25 February, with a representative of the Group.  Lindsey Collen’s letter of refusal  23 February 2018. To: Mr. Bruno La CharmanteGroup Communication ManagerLe Defi Media Group,Labourdonnais Street, Port Louis Dear Sir, Following our brief conversation on the telephone, I wish to thank you very much for your kind letter received today, in which you inform me that, in the context of 50 Years’ Mauritian Independance, the Defi Media Group has chosen, through an independent jury, 50 organizations and Mauritians, including me, for an award for a contribution to the country. However, it is not possible for me to accept the Award. This is for many reasons, including the fact that any contribution I may have made to “démocratie/Media” is not really an individual contribution. In addition, my commitment has been, still is and I hope will continue be, for reasons other than any formal reconnaissance. I hope you will understand. I would like to put on record my appreciation of your celebration, as a Group, of the de-colonization process. I wish you and the Group all the best for the Award Ceremony. Yours sincerely, Lindsey Collen 
While the Le Defi Media Group announces, in its Le Dimanche Hebdo of 4th March and on-line Le Defi from 3rd March, that the Group gave an Award to 50 people, including LALIT member Lindsey Collen, in their event at the Swami Vivekananda Convention Centre on 3 March 2018 to celebrate 50 years’ Independence, Lindsey Collen had, in fact, refused the Award.
So, in the interests of the truth, we are putting this on record.
 She refused the Award in a letter of 23 February, published below. The two reasons she mentioned were, inter alia, that any contribution she made was not an individual contribution and that her motivation has not been, is not and will not be in order to get such recognition.
 She had to insist on this refusal, in two telephone calls on 24 February and 25 February, with a representative of the Group.
  Lindsey Collen’s letter of refusal 
 23 February 2018.
 To: Mr. Bruno La Charmante
Group Communication Manager
Le Defi Media Group,
Labourdonnais Street, Port Louis
 Dear Sir,
 Following our brief conversation on the telephone, I wish to thank you very much for your kind letter received today, in which you inform me that, in the context of 50 Years’ Mauritian Independance, the Defi Media Group has chosen, through an independent jury, 50 organizations and Mauritians, including me, for an award for a contribution to the country.
 However, it is not possible for me to accept the Award.
 This is for many reasons, including the fact that any contribution I may have made to “démocratie/Media” is not really an individual contribution. In addition, my commitment has been, still is and I hope will continue be, for reasons other than any formal reconnaissance. I hope you will understand.
 I would like to put on record my appreciation of your celebration, as a Group, of the de-colonization process. I wish you and the Group all the best for the Award Ceremony.
 Yours sincerely,
 Lindsey Collen
 

