LALIT launches new Mass Move to Replace Asbestos Housing
16.08.2017
LALIT branches in different regions have launched, together with EDC Housing Estate residents, a new move to mobilize for the Government to take charge of replacing their asbestos housing with a proper house. “This break-down, dispose-of, and rebuild” process needs to be done at once as a matter of emergency. It is not a question of means testing either,” said Rada Kistnasamy when asked by LALIT web-page. The Cites in Moka and Rosebelle have set the ball rolling. “There are some 59 Housing Estates with asbestos panels,” said Rajni Lallah, “and people just simply do not have the wherewithal to break them down and dispose of the materials safely”. The Truth and Justice Commission called for this to be accomplished urgently six years ago, she added. LALIT believes that the Permanent Secretary of Housing will have to take her responsibility now. The Minister of Housing has not replied to the earlier petitions sent to him about asbestos dangers four months ago. The Housing Minister Showkutally Soodhun is already discredited over a number of issues: his death threat at a religious gathering against the Opposition Leader, his near breaking of relations with Qatar off his own bat over the stand-off between Saudi Arabia and Qatar, his taking the private jet of the Saudi Arabian Prince Salman. This is why inhabitants of the dangerous housing in EDC and the housing that is collapsing in Cite Richelieu, are addressing petitions to the Permanent Secretary, Mrs. D. Allagapen.   We have pleasure in reproducing the petitions, which right now are being mailed individually by inhabitants. Each one is keeping a copy of his or her Registered Letter receipt. The petition is being co-ordinated by LALIT branches in different regions in joint committees with the EDC residents. To: Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Land and Housing, Ebene. Dear Sir, I, the signatory, represent a household residing in an “asbestos house” dangerous to the health of my family. I know that you are, ultimately, the Officer-in-Charge of defective or dangerous housing sold or leased or rented to people like us. Many of us have already complained and appealed to the Authorities. To no avail. Whether we are owners of our houses or not, and even if we are owners of the land, we are all, whatever the case, living in dangerous accommodation supplied by the Government. It was already dangerous accommodation when we moved in, and/or when we acquired the lodgings. For us, personally, to undertake replacing asbestos panels, as you know very well, exposes us and our children and our neighbours to even more health risks. We do not have the know-how, let alone the equipment, let alone the wherewithal to work with or dispose safely of the asbestos. As you know, the older the asbestos panels get, the higher the risk of contamination, year by year, as it becomes more friable. Thus we write to you. We refer you also to the Truth and Justice Commission Report of 2011 which specifies that this dangerous situation must be remedied at once by the State. What happened then? We have heard of no overall plan. It is your Ministry’s responsibility to address this situation immediately and on a non-means-tested basis. But instead of this, we hear only of Government subsidising luxury villas that sugar bosses are selling to millionaires from abroad. So, we write to you now to demand: That Government replace our existing asbestos house with a safe and durable house?  We are aware that there is supposed to be an Inter-Ministerial National Committee on the removal of asbestos in EDC/Ex-CHA houses set up to be responsible for the complete removal of asbestos in 59 EDC Housing Estates. But, we have not been informed of the State’s plan to end our increasing exposure to the health risks involved from breathing in asbestos dust. We would be grateful if a meeting could be arranged through the Joint Committees (see below) between our representatives and yourself to discuss the precise plans that Government has for destroying dangerous housing and building new housing before we suffer further harm from the dangerous housing we have been supplied by your Ministry.   Yours sincerely,   .............................................                          .....................................Signature                                                         Date                           Name [of occupant] ....................................................................Exact address........................................................  EDC in ..................................................................CC Permanent Secretary, Minister of HealthPlease reply, as well as to me individually, also to our representatives in the Joint LALIT and EDC Housing Estate Committees that are coordinating this petition, c/o Rada KistnasamyA: Sekreter Permanan, Minister Later ek Lozman, EbeneSer Misye/Madam,Mwa, antan ki sinyater, mo reprezant mo fami. Nu res dan enn lakaz lamyant, setadir dan lozman ki reprezant enn danze pu nu lasante. Mo okuran ki anfindekont, u mem sa Ofisye Ansarz kan vann, donn bay, uswa lwe lakaz danzere avek dimunn kuma nu. Buku ant nu finn deza fer konplint, finn deza fer apel ar bann lotorite. San sikse.Ki nu finn aste lakaz la ubyin non, ki nu finn osi aste later la ubyin non, nu tu pe viv, anfindekont, dan lozman ki Guvernman finn furni, e ki defektiv, mem danzere. Li ti deza danzere kan nu finn kumans res ladan e/ubyin kan nu finn vinn propriyeter lakaz la. Kuma u byin kone, si par nu mem nu rod anlev e ranplas pano lamyant, sa pu expoz nu, nu zanfan ek nu vwazin ar pli grav danze lasante ankor. Nu pena ni konesans neseser, ni lekipman neseser, ni mwayin pu fer sa travay la, ni mwayin debaras pano lamyant dan enn fason kot lasante tu dimunn proteze. Kuma u deza kone, plis pano lamyant vinn vye, plis ena risk kontaminasyon, amezir li vinn kram-kram, e kas-kase, lane apre lane. Alor, samem nu pe ekrir u.Rapor Komisyon Zistis ek Laverite 2011 ti dir klerman ki Leta bizin remedye a sa sityasyon danzere la tutswit. Me, ki finn arive? Nu pa finn tann okenn lanons enn plan global. Li responsabilite u Minister pu adres sa sityasyon la imedyatman e san means-test. Selman, anmemtan u Minister pe flank nu sek, nu tann gran gran lanons ki Guvernman pe donn fasilite ek pe kareman donn sibsid, san means-test, pu tablisman mont vila delix pu vann ar milyarder depi deor. Alor nu pe ekrir u pu fer demand swivan:Ki Guvernman ranplas nu lakaz lamyant avek enn lakaz an-dir ki nepli enn danze pu nu lasante. Nu okuran ki sipoze ena ena Komite Nasyonal Inter-Ministeryel pu debaras lamyant ki ti met dibut presizeman pu ki debaras lamyant dan lakaz EDC/ex-CHA dan 59 diferan site EDC.Me kantmem sa, u napa finn vinn inform nu lor ki exakteman Leta so plan ete pu ki fini ar sa risk maladi kan nu respir lapusyer lamyant.Nu ti pu apresye si u ti kapav aranz enn rankont atraver nu Komite Konzwin. Kumsa nu reprezantan kapav kone ki plan presi Guvernman ena pu demoli lakaz danzere, reranz nuvo lakaz pu ki nu pa sibir plis ditor, mem domaz, depi lozman ki u Minister finn furni nu.Sinserman, .............................................                          .....................................Sinyatir                                                           Dat                            Nom ....................................................................Ladres Exak ........................................................    EDC  ..................................................................CC Sektreter Permanan, Minister LasanteMo ti pu apresye si u kapav reponn mwa individyelman osi byin ki nu reprezantan dan Komite Konzwin LALIT – abitan site EDC ki pe kordinn sa petisyon-la,  c/o Rada Kistnasamy and Rajni Lallah, telefonn 208 5551 ubyin emel lalitmail@intnet.mu. 
LALIT branches in different regions have launched, together with EDC Housing Estate residents, a new move to mobilize for the Government to take charge of replacing their asbestos housing with a proper house. “This break-down, dispose-of, and rebuild” process needs to be done at once as a matter of emergency. It is not a question of means testing either,” said Rada Kistnasamy when asked by LALIT web-page. The Cites in Moka and Rosebelle have set the ball rolling.
 “There are some 59 Housing Estates with asbestos panels,” said Rajni Lallah, “and people just simply do not have the wherewithal to break them down and dispose of the materials safely”. The Truth and Justice Commission called for this to be accomplished urgently six years ago, she added.
 LALIT believes that the Permanent Secretary of Housing will have to take her responsibility now. The Minister of Housing has not replied to the earlier petitions sent to him about asbestos dangers four months ago. The Housing Minister Showkutally Soodhun is already discredited over a number of issues: his death threat at a religious gathering against the Opposition Leader, his near breaking of relations with Qatar off his own bat over the stand-off between Saudi Arabia and Qatar, his taking the private jet of the Saudi Arabian Prince Salman. This is why inhabitants of the dangerous housing in EDC and the housing that is collapsing in Cite Richelieu, are addressing petitions to the Permanent Secretary, Mrs. D. Allagapen.  
 We have pleasure in reproducing the petitions, which right now are being mailed individually by inhabitants. Each one is keeping a copy of his or her Registered Letter receipt. The petition is being co-ordinated by LALIT branches in different regions in joint committees with the EDC residents.
 To: Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Land and Housing, Ebene.
 Dear Sir,
 I, the signatory, represent a household residing in an “asbestos house” dangerous to the health of my family. I know that you are, ultimately, the Officer-in-Charge of defective or dangerous housing sold or leased or rented to people like us. Many of us have already complained and appealed to the Authorities. To no avail.
 Whether we are owners of our houses or not, and even if we are owners of the land, we are all, whatever the case, living in dangerous accommodation supplied by the Government. It was already dangerous accommodation when we moved in, and/or when we acquired the lodgings. For us, personally, to undertake replacing asbestos panels, as you know very well, exposes us and our children and our neighbours to even more health risks. We do not have the know-how, let alone the equipment, let alone the wherewithal to work with or dispose safely of the asbestos. As you know, the older the asbestos panels get, the higher the risk of contamination, year by year, as it becomes more friable. Thus we write to you.
 We refer you also to the Truth and Justice Commission Report of 2011 which specifies that this dangerous situation must be remedied at once by the State. What happened then? We have heard of no overall plan. It is your Ministry’s responsibility to address this situation immediately and on a non-means-tested basis. But instead of this, we hear only of Government subsidising luxury villas that sugar bosses are selling to millionaires from abroad.
 So, we write to you now to demand:
 That Government replace our existing asbestos house with a safe and durable house? 
 We are aware that there is supposed to be an Inter-Ministerial National Committee on the removal of asbestos in EDC/Ex-CHA houses set up to be responsible for the complete removal of asbestos in 59 EDC Housing Estates.
 But, we have not been informed of the State’s plan to end our increasing exposure to the health risks involved from breathing in asbestos dust.
 We would be grateful if a meeting could be arranged through the Joint Committees (see below) between our representatives and yourself to discuss the precise plans that Government has for destroying dangerous housing and building new housing before we suffer further harm from the dangerous housing we have been supplied by your Ministry.  
 Yours sincerely,
  
 .............................................                          .....................................
Signature                                                         Date                           
Name [of occupant] ....................................................................
Exact address........................................................  EDC in ..................................................................
CC Permanent Secretary, Minister of Health
Please reply, as well as to me individually, also to our representatives in the Joint LALIT and EDC Housing Estate Committees that are coordinating this petition, c/o Rada Kistnasamy
A: Sekreter Permanan, Minister Later ek Lozman, Ebene
Ser Misye/Madam,
Mwa, antan ki sinyater, mo reprezant mo fami. Nu res dan enn lakaz lamyant, setadir dan lozman ki reprezant enn danze pu nu lasante. Mo okuran ki anfindekont, u mem sa Ofisye Ansarz kan vann, donn bay, uswa lwe lakaz danzere avek dimunn kuma nu. Buku ant nu finn deza fer konplint, finn deza fer apel ar bann lotorite. San sikse.
Ki nu finn aste lakaz la ubyin non, ki nu finn osi aste later la ubyin non, nu tu pe viv, anfindekont, dan lozman ki Guvernman finn furni, e ki defektiv, mem danzere. Li ti deza danzere kan nu finn kumans res ladan e/ubyin kan nu finn vinn propriyeter lakaz la. Kuma u byin kone, si par nu mem nu rod anlev e ranplas pano lamyant, sa pu expoz nu, nu zanfan ek nu vwazin ar pli grav danze lasante ankor. Nu pena ni konesans neseser, ni lekipman neseser, ni mwayin pu fer sa travay la, ni mwayin debaras pano lamyant dan enn fason kot lasante tu dimunn proteze. Kuma u deza kone, plis pano lamyant vinn vye, plis ena risk kontaminasyon, amezir li vinn kram-kram, e kas-kase, lane apre lane. Alor, samem nu pe ekrir u.
Rapor Komisyon Zistis ek Laverite 2011 ti dir klerman ki Leta bizin remedye a sa sityasyon danzere la tutswit. Me, ki finn arive? Nu pa finn tann okenn lanons enn plan global. Li responsabilite u Minister pu adres sa sityasyon la imedyatman e san means-test. Selman, anmemtan u Minister pe flank nu sek, nu tann gran gran lanons ki Guvernman pe donn fasilite ek pe kareman donn sibsid, san means-test, pu tablisman mont vila delix pu vann ar milyarder depi deor. 
Alor nu pe ekrir u pu fer demand swivan:
Ki Guvernman ranplas nu lakaz lamyant avek enn lakaz an-dir ki nepli enn danze pu nu lasante. 
Nu okuran ki sipoze ena ena Komite Nasyonal Inter-Ministeryel pu debaras lamyant ki ti met dibut presizeman pu ki debaras lamyant dan lakaz EDC/ex-CHA dan 59 diferan site EDC.
Me kantmem sa, u napa finn vinn inform nu lor ki exakteman Leta so plan ete pu ki fini ar sa risk maladi kan nu respir lapusyer lamyant.
Nu ti pu apresye si u ti kapav aranz enn rankont atraver nu Komite Konzwin. Kumsa nu reprezantan kapav kone ki plan presi Guvernman ena pu demoli lakaz danzere, reranz nuvo lakaz pu ki nu pa sibir plis ditor, mem domaz, depi lozman ki u Minister finn furni nu.
Sinserman,
 .............................................                          .....................................
Sinyatir                                                           Dat                            
Nom ....................................................................
Ladres Exak ........................................................    EDC  ..................................................................
CC Sektreter Permanan, Minister Lasante
Mo ti pu apresye si u kapav reponn mwa individyelman osi byin ki nu reprezantan dan Komite Konzwin LALIT – abitan site EDC ki pe kordinn sa petisyon-la,  c/o Rada Kistnasamy and Rajni Lallah, telefonn 208 5551 ubyin emel lalitmail@intnet.mu.
 

