Land to be used for food production: Fishermen of the South-East coast demand
28.11.2017
LALIT militants and fishermen of the South-Eastern coast of Mauritius gathered in a second Lavwa Peser assembly last Wednesday. The Director of Fisheries was present to give a report of what the Ministry had done concerning demands put forward in the last Assembly (see http://www.lalitmauritius.org/en/newsarticle/1997/lavwa-peser-ndash-a-new-form-of-organisation-of-joint-lalit-fishermen-committees-is-born/).The letter below concerning fishermen's demand for land to be used for food production and transformation based work for fishers, planters and workers in the region addressed to the Minister of Agro-Industry, copy to the Minister of Fishing was presented to the Director for him to remit to the Minister. The letter demands such utilisation of land instead of land being used for luxury real estate projects and for sugar/cane production.After 9 years of no new fishing cards being issued by the State, registered artisanal fishermen have decreased from 2,400 to 1,925. Consecutive governments have discouraged artisanal fishing, but have actively promoted hotel and real estate industries on the coast.Fishermen and Lalit militants have added to growing mobilisation of fishers for new fishing cards. The Director announced in the last assembly that only 300 new fishing cards are being issued in batches of 40-45. The procedure for obtaining fishing cards, he explained, is that successful applicants are sent letters to request them to go to their District hospital for a medical check-up. If they are medically fit, they then get letters to go to a one-month course for fishers at the Pointe au Sable fishing centre. After finishing this course, they can then obtain their fishing cards. 43 letters have been released nationally in all fishing zones this month.  A Minis Agro-Indistri ek Sekirite AlimanterDepite no. 11 – Vieux Grand Port – Rose BelleLonorab Mahen Seeruttun22 Novam, 2017PETISYON A MINIS AGRO-INDISTRI EK SEKIRITE ALIMANTEREtan done: Aktivite turistik ek imobilye nuvo lotel, proze vila-milyoner, devlopman imobilye lor later agrikol lor lakot pe antrav travay peser artizanal : nu riske perdi plas kot nu gayn labwet, perdi plas muyaz, spor notik ek bato turistik ek vila zenn nu travay dan lagon;Destriksyon plas travay travayer lindistri sikriyer e asterla li finn vinn kler ki disik/kann pena lavenir – li ni furni plas travay stab par milye, ni li amenn reveni pu pei, ni li amenn deviz;Lizinn ki anplway manb nu fami finn ferme Mahebourg ek Flacq ki vedir pena plas travay ki pe kree pu manb nu fami lor lakot;Lotel ek lavant vila-de-lix pa amenn prodiksyon ek kree byin tigit anplwa konpare avek prodiksyon;Peser ek planter lor lakot ant Mahebourg ek Flacq deza kontribiye dan sekter alimanter e nu anvi lemwayin pu devlop sekter-la plis ankor; Nu, peser artizanal organize dan Lavwa Peser (Grand Sable-Bambous Virieux-Vieux Grand Port- Ville Noire-Cité La Chaux ansam avek rezyonal LALIT Curepipe/Lesid) prezan dan rasanbleman peser zordi Sant Sosyal, Vieux Grand Port, Merkredi 22 Novam, 2017, nu fer demand swivan a Minis Agro-Indistri ki osi depite pu sirkonskripsyon Vieux Grand Port-Rose Belle:Stop permi pu nuvo lotel ek vila-milyoner lor later agrikol;Servi later agrikol Rose-Belle ek lor lezot tablisman baze lor travay planter, peser artizanal ek travayer lor lakot pu prodiksyon alimanter lor gran lesel. Shifte sutyin, infrastriktir ek sibvansyon ki pe done pu kann, donn li sa nuvo sekter la ki inklir transformasyon ek prosesing manze, inklir pwason, inite resers alimanter, stokaz pu pwason ek prodwi agrikol osi byin ki plantasyon agrikol modern.Transform tablisman Rose-Belle pu li vinn enn model inite prodiksyon alimanter lor gran lesel dan lekel peser artizanal ena enn rol kle.Fer tablisman osi rant dan sa kalite prodiksyon-la pu ki ena prodiksyon, kreasyon anplwa stab, sekirite alimanter, deviz ek reveni pu pei.Kopi a Minis Lapes, Lonorab Prem Koonjoo/Depite Vieux Grand Port-Rose Belleatraver Direkter Fisheries, M. Soondron. 
LALIT militants and fishermen of the South-Eastern coast of Mauritius gathered in a second Lavwa Peser assembly last Wednesday. The Director of Fisheries was present to give a report of what the Ministry had done concerning demands put forward in the last Assembly (see http://www.lalitmauritius.org/en/newsarticle/1997/lavwa-peser-ndash-a-new-form-of-organisation-of-joint-lalit-fishermen-committees-is-born/).
The letter below concerning fishermen's demand for land to be used for food production and transformation based work for fishers, planters and workers in the region addressed to the Minister of Agro-Industry, copy to the Minister of Fishing was presented to the Director for him to remit to the Minister. The letter demands such utilisation of land instead of land being used for luxury real estate projects and for sugar/cane production.
After 9 years of no new fishing cards being issued by the State, registered artisanal fishermen have decreased from 2,400 to 1,925. Consecutive governments have discouraged artisanal fishing, but have actively promoted hotel and real estate industries on the coast.
Fishermen and Lalit militants have added to growing mobilisation of fishers for new fishing cards. The Director announced in the last assembly that only 300 new fishing cards are being issued in batches of 40-45. The procedure for obtaining fishing cards, he explained, is that successful applicants are sent letters to request them to go to their District hospital for a medical check-up. If they are medically fit, they then get letters to go to a one-month course for fishers at the Pointe au Sable fishing centre. After finishing this course, they can then obtain their fishing cards. 43 letters have been released nationally in all fishing zones this month.
 
 A Minis Agro-Indistri ek Sekirite Alimanter
Depite no. 11 – Vieux Grand Port – Rose Belle
Lonorab Mahen Seeruttun
22 Novam, 2017
PETISYON A MINIS AGRO-INDISTRI EK SEKIRITE ALIMANTER
Etan done:
 
 Nu, peser artizanal organize dan Lavwa Peser (Grand Sable-Bambous Virieux-Vieux Grand Port- Ville Noire-Cité La Chaux ansam avek rezyonal LALIT Curepipe/Lesid) prezan dan rasanbleman peser zordi Sant Sosyal, Vieux Grand Port, Merkredi 22 Novam, 2017, nu fer demand swivan a Minis Agro-Indistri ki osi depite pu sirkonskripsyon Vieux Grand Port-Rose Belle:
Kopi a Minis Lapes, Lonorab Prem Koonjoo/Depite Vieux Grand Port-Rose Belle
atraver Direkter Fisheries, M. Soondron. 

