Launch of Ti Liv LALIT or The LALIT Booklet
17.07.2017
LALIT gathered members, supporting members and people interested in the party for an Assembly on Sunday 16 July, at which the highlight was the launch of the new text Ti Liv LALIT (The LALIT Booklet). 25 years’ ago, LALIT brought out the first Ti Liv LALIT, which has acted as organizational guidelines for the party. About two years ago when it was completely out-of-print, we decided to revisit it. We studied it, and found it a fine document for its moment in history, but decided that instead of “reworking it”, we would write the booklet anew. It has taken a full two years, with Roland Boussac insisting every few weeks on us not letting this work “slip off the agenda”, as chapter by chapter drafted by different central committee members, it was discussed in the Program Meeting and then sent out to all the branches for general discussion, amendment, suggestions and so on. Then back to the centre of the party. Ti Liv LALIT is a pocket-sized booklet, some 60 pages, with a beautiful cover design by Alain Ah-Vee. Each chapter was outlined for one-minute during the assembly, as an introduction for members, and an outline for those who do not have literacy. Anne-Marie Sophie, presiding jointly with Roland Boussac, said first what Ti Liv LALIT was not, It is not our program, she said, nor a guidelines to our organizational principles. She held up program documents and the little booklet that has some of our organizational principles in it. It is rather, she said, a book about what LALIT, as an organization, is. This way, a new member can, in one read, really catch up. So Rada Kistnasamy spoke for one minute on the chapter on the structure of LALIT, and how its democracy operates. Ram Seegobin spoke for a minute on LALIT’s history, as an organization, from when it began as a monthly political review in Kreol until today, going through different phases. Alain Ah-Vee spoke on the importance of a political party in the struggle; without one, he said, people might overturn a regime, but they will certainly not create a new kind of society. Ragini Kistnasamy spoke on the main thrust of LALIT’s political program around issues at a national level, like the land question, job creation, and at a more international level, from decolonization to opposing military occupation, as in Palestine. Rajni Lallah spoke on the revolutionary nature of this program. Our program is not like other parties’ programs, which at best are “government programs” or what they intend to do for electors in the next 5 years. Our program is much vaster, aiming to change the nature of society, by analyzing how it is, and how we’d like it to be one day, and then how to get there. Lindsey Collen spoke on the party’s strategy, how change will come about not through a change in mentality, nor prayer nor “education”, as the cliché goes, but through the coming together of a political party like LALIT, the leaders at workplace and neighbourhood level, and the action of the working class masses. Anne-Marie rounded off with a list of ongoing struggles that LALIT is involved in over decades. A cake was then cut. And what a cake it was. It had the beautiful cover design printed on the icing sugar. So everyone could “fer labus du”.
LALIT gathered members, supporting members and people interested in the party for an Assembly on Sunday 16 July, at which the highlight was the launch of the new text Ti Liv LALIT (The LALIT Booklet). 25 years’ ago, LALIT brought out the first Ti Liv LALIT, which has acted as organizational guidelines for the party. About two years ago when it was completely out-of-print, we decided to revisit it. We studied it, and found it a fine document for its moment in history, but decided that instead of “reworking it”, we would write the booklet anew. It has taken a full two years, with Roland Boussac insisting every few weeks on us not letting this work “slip off the agenda”, as chapter by chapter drafted by different central committee members, it was discussed in the Program Meeting and then sent out to all the branches for general discussion, amendment, suggestions and so on. Then back to the centre of the party. Ti Liv LALIT is a pocket-sized booklet, some 60 pages, with a beautiful cover design by Alain Ah-Vee. Each chapter was outlined for one-minute during the assembly, as an introduction for members, and an outline for those who do not have literacy.
 Anne-Marie Sophie, presiding jointly with Roland Boussac, said first what Ti Liv LALIT was not, It is not our program, she said, nor a guidelines to our organizational principles. She held up program documents and the little booklet that has some of our organizational principles in it. It is rather, she said, a book about what LALIT, as an organization, is. This way, a new member can, in one read, really catch up.
 So Rada Kistnasamy spoke for one minute on the chapter on the structure of LALIT, and how its democracy operates.
 Ram Seegobin spoke for a minute on LALIT’s history, as an organization, from when it began as a monthly political review in Kreol until today, going through different phases.
 Alain Ah-Vee spoke on the importance of a political party in the struggle; without one, he said, people might overturn a regime, but they will certainly not create a new kind of society.
 Ragini Kistnasamy spoke on the main thrust of LALIT’s political program around issues at a national level, like the land question, job creation, and at a more international level, from decolonization to opposing military occupation, as in Palestine.
 Rajni Lallah spoke on the revolutionary nature of this program. Our program is not like other parties’ programs, which at best are “government programs” or what they intend to do for electors in the next 5 years. Our program is much vaster, aiming to change the nature of society, by analyzing how it is, and how we’d like it to be one day, and then how to get there.
 Lindsey Collen spoke on the party’s strategy, how change will come about not through a change in mentality, nor prayer nor “education”, as the cliché goes, but through the coming together of a political party like LALIT, the leaders at workplace and neighbourhood level, and the action of the working class masses.
 Anne-Marie rounded off with a list of ongoing struggles that LALIT is involved in over decades.
 A cake was then cut. And what a cake it was. It had the beautiful cover design printed on the icing sugar. So everyone could “fer labus du”.

