Letter from America: Struggle for Reproductive Justice in the US by Elsa Wiehe
19.03.2011
As we have recently celebrated International Women’s Day, whileMauritian women continue the struggle to decriminalize abortion and tofight for equity, as Muvman Liberasyon Fam ratified a newmanifesto, here in the United States, women’s right are under attackonce again. There is much at stake at the beginning of 2011, as theUnited States House of Representatives introduced a number of egregiouslegislative bills that puts a ban on federal funding for organizationsperforming abortions, regardless of whether they use this funding forabortions. This means that organizations such as Planned Parenthood,where millions of women seek health care thus would be defunded. Womenwould lose access to birth control, Pap smears, breast-cancerscreenings, and many other types of preventive health care. This billrepresents another example of imperial rule. The US strives to cutsocial programs to increase the budget allocated to the police, theprison industrial complex, and intelligence on the domestic front, andAmerican wars abroad. This bill also constitutes a crude manifestationof sexism and patriarchy dressed in theological rhetoric. Thehigh profile bill, named “HR3” or the “No Taxpayer Funding for AbortionAct” was introduced by Congressman Chris Smith, the House’s mostfervent anti-abortion member. (1) He described this proposal as one ofthe House’s highest legislative priorities, contrary to the initialpromise of creating jobs. The most outrageous part of the bill is thatit changes the existing exceptions that allow for federal funding forabortions in case of rape or incest. Sexism and misogyny reach theirparoxysm in the new bill which contains language that redefines themeaning of rape. The bill proposes to substitute rape with “forciblerape” and therefore specifies the kinds of rape that are “valid” forwomen to get an abortion. As the monthly  Socialist Worker (2)argues, this means that statutory rape would not apply, and that womenwould be in the position to prove that they had been raped againsttheir will. This would in effect force raped women to carry theirunwanted pregnancies to term by redefining rape as “good” or “bad.” Cecile Richards, the President of  Planned Parenthood  United States, interviewed on  Democracy Now! on February 16, 2011, says that this bill is the most far reaching billever seen because not only it codifies the existing law that federalfunds cannot be used for abortion but also includes a variety of othercuts, including cuts to tax benefits for small-business owners whoprovide health care coverage if this coverage includes abortion. Inaddition, it takes away the right of women to have abortions even incases where there is desperate medical need. The acclaimed journalistAmy Goodman of  Democracy Now!  called this bill the “mostdangerous legislative assault on women’s health ever” that “could placesevere limitations on women’s access to reproductive services.” (3) Ineffect, women in the United States are facing the gravest assault attheir reproductive rights.The bill has passed in the House ofRepresentatives. Women’s organizations and health care centers at largeare fighting this legislative push with all their might. Thousands tookto the streets to march on February 26 2011. The bill has fortunatelynot yet gone through the Democrat-majority Senate, and it is notexpected to pass. Nevertheless, this is an opportunity to loudlydenounce such measures, reflect on the contemporary political, socialand cultural context that allows such legislative assaults on women tostill be introduced in our political space, and to recraft politicalstrategies to support women’s rights to reproductive justice. Iuse the term “reproductive justice” here in the context of the debateon abortion. This term emerged in the 1990s in the United States as anew way of capturing women’s differentiated struggle for reproductiverights in light of structures of oppression linked to capitalism,racism, and patriarchy. Reproductive justice goes beyond the simplebinary of being “for” a woman’s right to abortion or “against” awoman’s right to abortion. The abortion debate in the United States istoo often reduced to this simple dichotomy: on the one hand, the“pro-life” group, those who advocate for repelling access to abortionservices on moral or religious, or legislative grounds and vilify womenwho “choose” abortion, and on the other, the “pro-choice” group, thosewho advocate for access to such services on the same grounds, defendingwomen’s right to “choose.” I take issue with the liberal notion ofrational choice, because it neglects the broader social contexts forwomen’s choices and women’s health. Reproductive justicerecasts abortion and women’s health and rights in light of the socialstructures that women function in and struggle against and in light ofthe overall goal to achieve women’s well-being in mental, political,economic, and spiritual, and social terms in an equitable society.Reproductive justice recognizes that women’s choices are not solelytheir own, but rather they are intricately shaped by the inequalitieslinked to social structures of patriarchy, capitalism, and racism.Reproductive justice recognizes that not all women’s struggle will bethe same. In other words, inequalities in income, differential accessto social and health services, differential access to adequate andaffordable housing, inequalities in distribution of physical andemotional labor within and outside the household, inequalities inaccess to knowledge and information about reproductive rights,services, and available resources are all factors, among many others,affecting women’s health and sovereignty over their bodies.Socioeconomic status is cited as being the greatest factor contributingto inequity in access to healthcare, above gender and race (4). Ifpassed, the HR3 bill would differentially impact poor women have hadthe greatest struggle in access to health and health care and have hadto struggle for the right to have abortions when necessary,particularly in light of the conservative backlash against the 1973court case decision  Roe vs. Wade,  which made abortions legalin the United States. It would particularly affect poorAfrican-American women in the United States, who are 3.5 times morelikely to have abortions (5). On the other hand, other women have hadto struggle for the right  to have children against anoppressive, colonial, and imperial state. Native American women, forexample, have faced a long history of forced abortion and sterilizationup until the early 1980s (6) as part of a larger racist genocide ofNative Peoples in America. Understanding that structural conditionsdifferently affect women’s choices over their bodies and lives movesthe abortion debate away from a solely a question of individual rights,individual choice, or individual morality. It is not that awoman’s individual rights are not important, but individual rights mustbe understood in in a context. To achieve reproductive freedom, we needto understand how society is structured with interlocking systems ofoppression of class, gender, and race. Women need to make decisionsabout their bodies free of constraints, oppression, or coercion. (7)Women need to have the right to choose safe and affordable abortions ifthey decide so. We make these choices as actors not above and beyondthe economic, social, and political means that are available in ourcontexts, but rather we make these choices within and through thesecontexts. The new MLF manifesto says in Article 8: “We want to be freeto reproduce (physically) in an atmosphere of respect. We want todecide when we will reproduce. For this we need free and easilyaccessible contraception and decriminalized abortion. Give us socialhousing, employment and social services, so that we are supported inthe work of nurturing people in our care (children, the aged, the sick,etc).” (8) In other words, reproductive justice supports reproductivefreedom: the freedom to have children when we want, while beingsupported by a socio-political-economic context that provides socialservices and access to adequate and free health care and healthknowledge. Let us continue our struggle for abortion rights not interms of liberal individual rights, but in terms of women’s health andrights at large and the struggles needed to transform a society forequitable distribution of knowledge, access, and resources towardhealth care and reproduction. (1) http://www.examiner.com/democrat-in-national/h-r-3-dem-slams-gop-for-redefining-rape-bill-a-violent-act-against-women(2) Socialist Worker, March 2011, Number 728, p.18.(3) http://www.examiner.com/democrat-in-national/h-r-3-dem-slams-gop-for-redefining-rape-bill-a-violent-act-against-women(4)Merzel, C. (2000). Gender differences in health care access indicatorsin an urban, low-income community. American Journal of Public Health,90(6), 909-916.(5) http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2011/tables/11s0099.pdf(6)Julie Sullivan, "State will admit sterilization past", PortlandOregonian (November 15, 2002). Available online athttp://www.people1.org/eugenics/eugenics_article_6.html(7) Correa, Sonia and Rosalind Petchesky. “Reproductive and Sexual Rights: A Feminist Perspective.”   Feminist Theory Reader. Ed. Carole R. McCann and Seung-Kyung Kim. New York: Routledge, 2003. 88-102(8) http://www.lalitmauritius.org/viewnews.php?id=1165

