Mauritian Kreol in Seven Easy Lessons A New LPT publication by Mark Frew
08.08.2003
This Friday evening at 6.00 p.m Ledikasyon Pu Travayer launched a new publication ‘Mauritian Creole in Seven Easy Lessons’. The author, Mark Frew, teaches Chemistry and Theory of Knowledge at Le Bocage. Ms. Meena Seetulsing, director of the Mauritius College of the Air (MCA) welcomed this new book in her opening remarks. The book is on sale in all bookshops at Rs 75.00. In its preface Mark Frew writes: “Mauritian Creole in 7 Easy Lessons is a step by step guide to learning Mauritian Creole. Each chapter is introduced by a dialogue, followed by a vocabulary list and explanation notes to bring out certain points of grammar. The spelling used in this book is the spelling rules recommended by Edikasyon pu Travayer which is the same spelling adopted in modern books published in Mauritian Creole. Mauritian Creole in 7 Easy Lessons was originally written as a series of personal notes that I compiled together as I was learning the language. Each time I discovered a new point of grammar, I simply wrote it down until I had a general overview of how the language is put together. The dialogues are based on real conversations, although the names themselves are fictive, and the conversations adapted to bring out the grammatical points in an ordered, easy to follow fashion. I wish to thank Rada Kistnasamy and  Alain Ah Vee for checking of the manuscript and for the many helpful suggestions and corrections in the choice of words and expressions used in this book.” Mark Frew presented a paper on “the influence of Chinese on Mauritian Creole” at the Colloquim on Mauritian Creole organised by Ledikasyon pu Travayer in October 2001.  He speaks English, French, Mauritian Creole, German, Swedish and Mandarin and is currently learning Spanish, Swahili and Hindi. He is the author of English Spelling and Pronunciation: a Guide to speakers of English as a Second language and an Etymology of Mauritian Creole Words. 

