May Day Greetings from the Democratic Socialist Perspective, Australia
12.05.2006
May Day Greetings from the Democratic Socialist Perspective, Australia, to Lalit and all those in struggle against imperialismDear Comrades,The Democratic Socialist Perspective of Australia sends you in Lalit and all those struggling in Mauritius our warmest revolutionary greetings on May Day. This May Day the working class and its allies can see the two sides of our dilemma starkly: US imperialism's continuing occupation of Iraq, threats to bomb Iran, and wars, torture, poverty and exploitation - the barbaric consequences of capitalism - around the globe. But in many parts of the world, people are waking up and fighting back - in France, the inspiring young workers and students again, even in the USA, the huge mobilisations of Latino workers on this day, but especially in Latin America, where the people of Cuba, Venezuela and Bolivia will celebrate this May Day with greater hope and confidence than for many years.In Latin America, the US's own "backyard", more and more people want to follow the example of Cuba's revolution, and Vietnam's liberation - a horrible affront and threat to the US imperialists, who thought the South American continent their personal fiefdom.During the heroic struggle against the US war on Vietnam, Che Guevara made a famous call to the world's people: "Create two, three many Vietnams". Follow the example of Vietnam, and thus help ease the pressure on Vietnam.We need to repeat that call, "Create two, three, many Vietnams, two, three many Cubas, two, three, many Venezuelas" and work to make them realities.In Venezuela today the people are winning huge gains under the leadership of President Hugo Chavez, and taking steps to build socialism, the first socialist revolution of the 21st Century. Imperialism is constantly looking to reverse the gains made, the victories won. It will try to subvert the social gains won in Vietnam, it is continuing its 46-year blockade and open aggression against Cuba, and it is showing increasing hostility against Venezuela. But that struggle continues, from the victory of the Cuban Revolution, to the final liberation of Vietnam in 1975, to the revolution taking place in Venezuela today.At the World Youth Festival in Venezuela last year, Hugo Chavez spoke to the leaders of the delegations, and reminded them of the dilemma posed by both Karl Marx and Rosa Luxemburg, the choice of "socialism or barbarism". Chavez pointed out that "Karl Marx could reflect, think and write looking towards a distant future, a century, the same could be said of Rosa Luxemburg..but for us it can't. The circumstances have changed terribly. The situation today is radically different. We don't have centuries in front of us, it could be decades at most that are left for the peoples of this planet to make a decision. Or we really change the social and economic order, we give real form, viability and outlet for socialism, we say now a new, renovated socialism of the 21st century, or we decide that life finishes on this planet. We no longer have the long time that Karl Marx had, or any other fighter of that era .."This reflection is something I feel deep in my heart because of my profound conviction that the planet is being degraded more and more everyday, and that life on this planet is under threat. Because of this today more than ever the dilemma has returned with much more force, 'socialism or barbarism'."I believe it is time that we take up with courage and clarity a political, social, collective and ideological offensive across the world," said Chavez. "A real offensive that permits us to move progressively, over the next years, the next decades, leaving behind the perverse, destructive, destroyer, capitalist model and go forward in constructing the socialist model to avoid barbarism and beyond that the annihilation of life on this planet. I believe this idea has a strong connection with reality. I don't think we have much time. Fidel Castro said in one of his speeches I read not so long ago, 'tomorrow could be too late, let's do now what we need to do'."Rosa Luxemburg also pointed out, "the happy idea of using a proletarian holiday celebration as a means to attain the eight-hour day was first born in Australia." Rosa concluded that "As long as the struggle of the workers against the bourgeoisie and the ruling class continues, as long as all demands are not met, May Day will be the yearly expression of these demands. And, when better days dawn, when the working class of the world has won its deliverance then too humanity will probably celebrate May Day in honor of the bitter struggles and the many sufferings of the past."So this May Day let's reaffirm our international solidarity, with the people of Iraq, and all those struggling against imperialism and their own ruling classes. Let's look to the inspiration of the people struggling in Latin America, especially Venezuela. Let's hasten our efforts to build the necessary socialist parties to unite the struggles, raise the political consciousness of the masses, and help lead in the struggle for socialism. Let's step up the international solidarity and collaboration between our organisations. We extend our solidarity to you in your campaign for the closing down of the US military base on Diego Garcia, and your world-wide petition towards that end. We add our voice to the call for the immediate decolonization of Diego Garcia, the complete closing down of the United States military base there, and the immediate right of return for all people from Diego Garcia forcibly removed between 1965 and 1973, with full reparations and compensation from the US and UK governments.We in Australia greatly benefited from the participation by Comrade Ram Seegobin at the very successful Third Asia Pacific Solidarity Conference in Sydney, March 25-28, 2005, and look forward to Lalit's participation in the 4th APISC on April 6-9, 2006. We look forward to greater collaboration and solidarity between the people struggling in Mauritius and Australia. All US occupiers and other troops Out of Iraq!Close down Diego Garcia base!Unite in solidarity against imperialist wars!Solidarity with the Bolivarian Revolution in Venezuela!Solidarity with socialist Cuba!Build the international socialist movement! Workers of the World Unite!Comradely greetings,John PercyNational PresidentDemocratic Socialist PerspectiveAustraliaMay 1, 2006      .

