MLF supports Movement against Sex Abuse in Sport
05.05.2018
There was a meeting held in Curepipe on Friday 27 April to plan support for Mauritian javelin thrower Jessika Rosun, who reported a case of sex abuse to the Australian police during the Commonwealth Games. The chef de mission, Kaysee Teeroovengadum, has since been forced to resign.Rajni Lallah was invited by the sportsmen and sportswomen organizing the support network for the athlete because the Muvman Liberasyon Fam that she is a leading member of had called for the removal from office of the President of the Mauritian National Olympic Committee, Philippe Hao Thyn Voon, for his outrageously sexist remarks about the case. (See article in our News Section dated 22 April 2018).At the meeting were 15 representatives from different sports. As well as support for Jessika Rosun, they deplore the generalized lack of power of the sports men and women relative to the bureaucracies that run competitive sports. Various tactics were discussed from a press conference to boycotting competitions if there is not change.
There was a meeting held in Curepipe on Friday 27 April to plan support for Mauritian javelin thrower Jessika Rosun, who reported a case of sex abuse to the Australian police during the Commonwealth Games. The chef de mission, Kaysee Teeroovengadum, has since been forced to resign.
Rajni Lallah was invited by the sportsmen and sportswomen organizing the support network for the athlete because the Muvman Liberasyon Fam that she is a leading member of had called for the removal from office of the President of the Mauritian National Olympic Committee, Philippe Hao Thyn Voon, for his outrageously sexist remarks about the case. (See article in our News Section dated 22 April 2018).
At the meeting were 15 representatives from different sports. As well as support for Jessika Rosun, they deplore the generalized lack of power of the sports men and women relative to the bureaucracies that run competitive sports. Various tactics were discussed from a press conference to boycotting competitions if there is not change.

