New Literacy Course Intake for 2012
14.12.2011
For anyone who you know who is over 18 years of age and who wants to learn to read and right, now is a good time to tell them about the LPT courses for next year. The reason for this is that there is a fantastic development. As you know, from January 2012 for the first time in history, the Kreol and Bhojpuri languages are to be introduced in primary schools. Now children in Std I will be able to learn to read and write in their mother tongue. This means that parents will be able to play an active role in their children’s education, if they are themselves literate, if they have mastered reading and writing in their own language. For 30 years now, adults have been learning to read and write at Ledikasyon pu Travayer. They all succeed. But, until 2012, Kreol was effectively banned from school in written form, and only just tolerated in oral form. This repression is now beginning to end. The Government has recognized Kreol. Today we must be proud of this recognition, and seize the moment!So LPT’s next course is specially dedicated to young parents of children starting primary school next year. Though anyone over 18 can join in. LALIT asks its web-visitors to please help LPT get the message out. It is not easy, as you may know, for a literacy teaching organization to get into contact with those who cannot read and write. But YOU may know someone. Ask them to come to LPT (at GRNW) for admission on Saturday 14 January from 10:30 a.m. to 12:00 midday, and every Saturday after that for the Course that lasts about 6 months. The fees are Rs10 per month, and there is an entrance fee of Rs6. They do not need to bring anything with them. Adults who want to contact us can also phone on 208 5551, preferably in the week before the 14 January, 2012, and ask to speak to Alain or Lindsey. Inform the person who wants to be able to learn to read and write, that they will soon be able to write a letter, send SMSs, read their own letters, read up on scientific or other subjects, and so on. Some people want to be able to read and write just to be able to plan their shopping, or an extention to their house; for this they need a bit of literacy and numeracy. Others want to be able to write down the words of songs they compose. Others want to write to a family member abroad. And so on. All this they will be able to do.                                                                                                    

