Once upon a time, on radio …
13.08.2006
Alain Ah-Vee,  LALIT  member, had been invited to be on the Radio  One program “Controverse” due to come up Friday 4 August. It was  on the question of using the mother tongue in education. Darlmah Naeck who  had invited him, also explained that the other guest would be University lecturer,  Veena Balgobin. Alain accepted.Mr. Naick then phoned back later. He informed Alain that he was now formally  “dis-inviting” him.To do something quite so rude demands a reason. He is not only an honourable  man, but he is also a rational man, Darlmah Naeck. So, reason he came up with.  The other guest, Veena Balgobin, who he had previously thought was “against”  the use of the mother tongue, he explains, is instead, he has just discovered,  in fact, “for” using the mother tongue. He needs one guest for,  one against. Rules is rules. So, he has been obliged to impose this strange and unusual “dis-invitation”  on Alain, who was to have been his guest.Supposing we believe his fairy story. Why not, after all, give the man the  benefit of the doubt.Now, read on …Next day, Alain Ah-Vee together with another  Lalit  member, Kisna  Kistnasamy, go to see Darlmah Naeck in another capacity and on another issue  altogether (elucidated later in this article). When Alain, who was, incidentally,  at school with Darlmah, pulls his leg about the “dis-invitation”,  and asks who he has finally got to speak “against” the mother  tongue to balance his program, this is what Darlmah Naeck, ever the reasonable  man, comes up with by way of explanation:He found out that Veena Balgobin, who he had, at first, thought was against,  then found out was for, turned out, in the end, to be against.So… you would think this was a prelude to re-inviting Alain, thus absolving  himself of his prior despicable behavior. Then he would again have one guest  for and one against, as the format of his radio program dictates.No.Life is never so simple.Darlmah Naeck announces barefacedly that he has invited Rada Tirvassen instead.  (Rada Tirvassen, of course, had no idea what had happened, so is an innocent  guest, in all this whose only relationship to the question is that he, like  Alain, is in favour of using the mother tongue.)To put the little cherry on top of Darlmah Naeck’s moral cake, as they  say, when the program finally comes out on air, he has invited three guests  (THREE), not the two he was supposedly bound to invite. He has invited Jimmy  Harmon (another innocent guest whose only relationship to the question is  that he, like Alain and Rada, is in favour of using the mother tongue.So, everyone in  Lalit  was busy laughing at Darlmah Naeck, wondering  what occult pressures this poor radio journalist had come under to make him  act so outright dishonourably. Now, read on ….When all of a sudden, Alain Ah-Vee suffered yet another “dis-invitation”  from another Radio Station.My goodness.On Thursday 3 August, he had been formally invited by Nawaz Noorbux to be  on a Radio Plus program the following Tuesday afternoon, 8 August, this time  on the role of diplomacy around the aggression on Lebanon. Foreign Affairs  Minister, Madun Dulloo, was also to be invited. This was confirmed a number  of times by Nawaz and by other people at Radio Plus. On the night of 7 August,  Lalit held a very moving and powerful vigil in support of the people of the  Lebanon and Palestine, and amongst other demands the gathering called for  diplomatic relations with Israel to be suspended.Then, on the morning of the day of the program, the phone rings. Alain happens  to be at the  Lalit  offices. It is the secretary at Radio Plus. She  tells Alain that Nawaz Noorbux’s program will be on “diplomacie”  and maybe there will be another one on “humanitaire”. So Alain  says, “Well, that means I come tonight?” She replies, “Nawaz  is going to phone you to explain to you not to come.”So, Nawaz, completely dictated to, just as Darlmah Naeck is, hides his head  in shame and can’t even bring himself to explain in person. Because  of course, he never phoned back. In his case, not even an attempt at an honourable  exit, or reasonable face on it.Twice in one week. This makes Alain Ah-Vee this week’s “person  most dis-invited by radio” on the planet. Lalit  has this kind of treatment from time to time. Just in case  people think we are so marginal as to be insignificant, one has to imagine  the lengths that some powers that be somewhere must have to go to to make  perfectly reasonable and perfectly honourable men like Naeck and Noorbux behave  with such irrationality, not to mention dishonour.And as everyone knows, on a permanent basis, neither MBC Radio nor MBC television  ever broadcast any program with Ram Seegobin viva voce, unless forced to by  electoral law.What effect does this kind of control have on presumably self-respecting  journalists’ psyches?Now read on …Once upon a time, in the pressAlain Ah-Vee and Kisna Kistnasamy, as part of the preparations for the Vigil  in support of the Lebanese and Palestinian people to be held on 7 August,  took a half day off work and went to see a number of editors of newspapers.  Their aim in going in person was to explain the general intention of  Lalit   and former President of the Republic Cassam Uteem in jointly organizing such  a vigil (see web articles), and in co-ordinating a petition that would be  there at the vigil for people to sign up to on the night. There would be only  four days in which to organize the solidarity vigil, and the Press could thus  contribute to the cause of ending the aggression, by informing their readers  of one of the local Mauritian responses to this main focus of all the international  news and media, as well as national press and media, world-wide. Not that  the Mauritian Press had, until then, been particularly helpful in exposing  the US-backed Israeli aggression. Anyway, on Thursday 4 August, they set off to see them all. First they went  to see Le Mauricien editor in chief, Gilbert Ahnee. He said he could carry  either a small article on the Friday, with the petition written up, or when  all the details were known about the Vigil, a longer one on the Saturday.  Alain and Kisna said the Saturday idea sounded much better. So a deadline  was duly agreed upon. The details for an article were duly submitted in time  to the email address agreed upon. According to his staff, Gilbert Ahnee did  not come to the office on Friday evening.No article appeared on Saturday.There was a small article on the Monday afternoon paper i.e. a few hours  before the night vigil was due to start. What happened? Perhaps Gilbert Ahnee was not well, and co-ordination with  his staff fell through.Read on …Similarly, Alain and Kisna had been to see Gerard Cateaux, editor of Week-End,  who was the only editor who had already written very good editorials denouncing  the agression of Israel and the US in the Middle East. He said he would put  a reporter in charge of writing something. All the Lalit members had to do  was to get the material to him and liaise. It would be carried in Sunday’s  newspaper. The journalist concerned, we happen to know, did write an article.  Sunday came and went without any article about the vigil. In fact, there was  no news on Lebanon at all. Nor was there an international page at all. Nor  an editorial.Inexplicable. Maybe Gerard Cateaux was also not well, and co-ordination somehow  fell through again. Coincidence, no doubt.Read on …Similarly, Alain and Kisna went to see Darlmah Naeck, 5-Plus Editor. He also  said he would carry the details for the event on Sunday. Just submit everything  in time. Alain and Kisna did.In his newspaper, too, there was nothing. Dis-invited twice on radio already.Maybe he was also not well, and co-ordination somehow fell through. Read on …A  Le Dimanche  reporter submitted an article, but it did not appear  in the newspaper.The only newspaper that carried an article at a time when it could have been  helpful was  L’Express Dimanche . It, however, had a miniscule  article, so small it failed to mention the participation in organizing the  event of the former President of the Republic in the protest.Please would everyone who has any tendency when they meet  Lalit   members to say, “But why didn’t you get that into the Press”,  take note of this amazing, true “Once upon a time …” story.Maybe we should try harder.

