Sign up to Petition to Close Down Military Base on Diego Garcia
13.04.2005
This email petition has been designed to keep the best of the age-old tradition of petitions, while making use of email, too. (For details, and background, read news item on petition launch. For whole book, you can click on the cover of the book on our home page.)WHAT TO DO:Step 1: Read the petitionStep 2: Select and copy all the text after the dotted line belowStep 3: Create a new mail message on your Internet mailStep 4: Paste the text you have just copied onto the new mail messageStep 5: Fill in your name and address at the endStep 6: Then you just have to cut & paste the email addresses into the "TO..." line in your mail message, and fill in the subject: "PETITION TO CLOSE MILITARY BASE ON DIEGO GARCIA"Step 7: Press SEND--------------- SELECT to copy as from here----------------------To: speaker@mail.house.gov; vice.president@whitehouse.gov; hofccommission@parliament.uk; ramnahp@intnet.mu; lalitmail@intnet.muSUBJECT : PETITION TO CLOSE MILITARY BASE ON DIEGO GARCIATo: The Hon. J. Dennis Hastert: Speaker of the House of Representatives, US CongressThe Hon. Ted Stevens: Chair (President Pro Tempore) of the US Senate.The Rt Hon Peter Hain MP: Office of the Leader of the House of Commons, UKThe Hon. Premnath Ramnah: Speaker of the National Assembly, Republic of MauritiusWe, the undersigned, call on the  House of Representatives of the USA, the Senate of the USA, the Parliament of Great Britain  and  the National Assembly of Mauritius, to work to ensure:1. The immediate decolonization of Diego Garcia and the Chagos Archipelago through the disbanding of the illegitimate "British Indian Ocean Territories"; the cancellation of the Orders in Council that prohibit the return of Chagossians to their native islands; the re-unification according to international law and the UN Charter, of the Republic of Mauritius that was dismembered as an illegal condition to Independence in 1968.2. An immediate halt to ever using Diego Garcia for B-52’s or other military apparatus to attack other countries (whether Afghanistan, Iraq or any other land) and the complete closing down of the United States military base on Diego Garcia; the organization of an ecological clean-up; a public undertaking that no other base be set up elsewhere to replace this one; the conversion of part of the base into a non-military Tsunami Warning Station for the Indian Ocean, and part into a UNESCO World Heritage Site around a vast ecological project to regenerate the coral and the lagoons.3. That an immediate visit by the Red Cross and respected journalists be organized, so that independent investigations can be conducted into the persistent allegations that there have been and/or are Guantanamo-style prisoners being held or "rendered" on or near Diego Garcia.4. The immediate right of return, as well as full reparations and compensation for damages, from the US and UK governments to all Chagossians forcibly removed between 1965 and 1973. NAME: ……………..….. … ORGANISATION (if any): …………...…..  FULL PHYSICAL ADDRESS : ……………   CITY /TOWN: …………..    POSTCODE/ZIP CODE:……..………….  COUNTY/ STATE : ………………..    COUNTRY :  ……………

