Supports  for Ragini Kistnasamy participation in  Gaza Freedom March
30.12.2009
We have pleasure to publish for the interest of our visitors supports received from organisations and individuals in Mauritius for the participation of LALIT`s member Ragini Kistnasamy in the Gaza Freedom March. Some are quoted bits and others are from emails,SMS and phone calls. Cassam Uteem, former President of the Republic: Sorry to hear that Kisna was arrested. Hope she is in good health and high spirits.Dini Lallah, writer.Vinesh Hookoomsing, former Pro Vice Chancellor: "We're very proud of Kisna! She's our people's flagship of solidarity with Palestine!" Veena Ramdin, shop assistant: "Thanks for giving us this information. We are supposed to get this on TV!"Suraj Ramdin, petrol station attendant. Ariana Cziffra, psycho-analyst.Sadna Jumnoodoo, for MLF.Daniella Bastien, lecturer: "Full support!"Marlene Joseph, for MLF: Mo ti al zwe lotel aswar mo pa ti tann Kisna lor Radyo. Mo gayn traka pu li, me mo kone li enn militant. Kan li sone to dir li mo anbras li byen for. Mo admir so kuraz".Jano Couacaud, artist: "Fer li konpliman. Li ena bel kuraz!"Touria Prayag: "That is a wonderful move, Ragini! Thanks. Ragini has my full support. I will send the emails and forward this one to my contacts. Kind regards, Touria" Martine Mavisa, Catering worker Jayraj Topsy , Male NurseAndre Pierre , Bricklayer/PensionerClet Adolphe, social worker: "Mo de tu ker avek reprezantan LALIT."Kavi Pyniandee: "Dir Kisna nu avek li. Kontiyn epdeyt nu."Mario Jean, diver: "Yer mo ti reysi tann Kisna koze lor Radyo Plus. Byen bon sa partisipasyon la. Felisit bann kamarad pu sa desizyon la. LALIT bizin kontinye."Sheila Wong, University Lecturer.Deepa Bookhun, journalist.Jean Claude Bibi, barrister, former Justice Minister: Transmet tu mo sutyen pu sa aksyon LALIT ek pu tu aksyon partisipan Gaza Freedom March. Mo tifi Kyara pe raport manif dan medya Belzik." Federation of Preschool Playgroups, Saresh Virahmalay: "Support for Kisna and the Gaza Freedom March". Anne-Marie Sophie: "Mo solider. Tu paret pe sofe. Nu res an kontak."Patrick Haberland: "Je soutiens cette marche."Medha Moti: "Bon kuraz e mersi. Li admirab sa aksyon-la. All the best"Kishore Pertab: "Mo sutenir lamars de sutyin a 100%"Miriam Narainsamy: "Li ena kuraz, mo sutenir li."Vidya Golam, teacher and writer.Dawood Auleear, President of Alif Society in The Vale, Fond du Sac: "Keep it up, we are with you. Best wishes."Marlene Joseph: "Bon kuraz e mersi. Admirab. All the Best"Sedley Assonne: Korl plus SMS: "Siper ki Kisna pe al Gaza!"Marousia  Bouvary: Mo Soutenir Gaza Freedom March. Mo solider avek tu dimunn lor lamars.Diya Jetsun: Hope Kisna is OK after release. Thinking of her.Ravi Jetsun: Ki nuvel Kisna, li ankor laba?Sahebdin Mosadeq, President of Institute for Consumer Protection: Calls for Egypt to open the Rafah Crossing.Afeeka Joolfoo, clerk: "Bon kuraz, Kisna!"Reaz Chuttoo Lor nom CTSP, nu felisit LALIT e nu sutenir laksyon ki pe amene lor konfli Israel/Palestine. Nu truv sa tre nob e nu sutenir sa kalite aksyon la.Nu finn partisip dan bann forum parey e nu pu kontiyn donn nu sutyin nerport kan bizin nu dan lalit pli divan.Madhu Gungadin : Bon kuraz Kisna, nu tu avek twa pran twa byin swin.Deepak Benydin : Exprim solidarite avek Ragini Kistnasamy ek Gaza Freedom March.Imran Dhanoo, social worker and leading member of Goomany Centre: "Chers amis, Nu au centre Dr Idrice Goomany nu soutenir action lalit et tous ban militants dans zot lamarche du 31 decembre lors gaza..nu prier pu ki bon dieu don zot kurage pour fer face a pharaon et son banne allies." Second message after arrest: "Courage to her and the others!"Vidula Nababsing: "We write this letter in order to express, via your presence on it, our support for the Gaza Freedom March. It is now over one year since the bombardment of Gaza, and we call for the siege to be lifted by Israel. We call also for the Egyptian government to open the Rafah crossing for the Marchers to go through, and also for Palestinians to be able to cross freely."Rashid Imrith : Konba Palestinn pa enn konba relizyon me enn konba tut enn lepep. Mem si fizikman nu pa laba ar nu leker nu ansam ar lepep Palestinyin er ar tu seki dan sa lamars-la"Cindy Clelie, teacher and LALIT: "Waoh! So much news live, thanks. International solidarite on the move! Extra ki Kisna pe viv sa pu nu tu."Tulsiraj Benydin: Federation of Civil Service and Other Unions solider avek konba lepep Palestinyen pu li gayn so patri. Nu kondann politik Israel anver lepep Palestinyen. Nu sutenir sa lamars la.Catherine Boudet:My warmest support to Kisna and their action in favour of the opening of Gaza. Thanks for keeping me informed.

