US Hunter-Killer Drone Crashes in Seychelles
20.12.2011
A United States huner-killer drone, a Q-9 Reaper, which is a large unmanned aircraft that can provide real-time data and carry weapons, crashed in Seychelles last week, 13 December, on the Mahe Airport. The drones are present in Seychelles, along with uniformed and armed military personel, as part of the SOFA, or “State of Forces Agreement”, that the US State forced upon the Seychelles President soon after the Lehmann Brothers bank crashed. Lehmann brothers held Seychelles bonds, and some half of the nationalized tuna canning factory, and its bankruptcy put Seychelles in a state of financial panic. These details all came out of the last WikiLeaks cables. The drone crash confirms the content of the SOFA in the WikiLeaks cables. (See other articles on our NEWS pages).The drone crash came only one week after Iran seized another drone, an RQ-170 Sentinel that was spying illegally on Iran, well into Iranian Airspace. Obama, in a far-fetched diplomatic move, has asked for the drone back! Ex-Vice President Dick Cheyney has fumed even more bizarrely that “The right response to that would have been to go in immediately after it had gone down and destroy it. You can do that from the air. You can do that with a quick airstrike, and in effect make it impossible for them to benefit from having captured that drone. I was told that the president had three options on his desk. He rejected all of them. They all involved sending somebody in to try to recover it, or if you can't do that, admittedly that would be a difficult operation, you certainly could have gone in and destroyed it on the ground with an airstrike. But he didn't take any of the options. He asked for them to return it. And they aren't going to do that.”The United States armed supremacy can be expected to be more and more irrational, as the empire’s economic system wobbles, and begins to crumble. The new all-out target of the US military is now quite openly “containment of China”, and the US is organizing a heavy military presence in the Pacific to this end, including vamping up its links with the Australian State, as China flexes its economic muscle, becoming the second largest economy in the world.No sooner had the SOFA cables become public than the Press world-wide and in Mauritius began to run huge articles on a “Chinese military base” in Seychelles. This is supposed to count as ex-post-facto “justification” of the US military presence on Seychelles. 

