Why you should vote for LALIT in the coming general election?
30.10.2019
 Our program is based on 37 years of building popular political mobilisation and movement on a permanent basis. This is why our credibility is recognised. Are you in favour of using sugar estate land and the vast ocean territory of the Republic of Mauritius for employment creation, direct and indirect? If you are, this is why you should vote for LALIT.Are you in favour of putting a STOP to destruction of sugar estate land to billionaires, of stopping the concreting over of good agricultural land with luxury villas and malls?Wouldn’t you prefer politics that channel sugar estates into food production rather than cane production with no future? Are you in favour of each sugar estate setting up factories for bio-food preservation and processing? If you are, then  you should vote for LALIT?Are you in favour of stopping State subsidies for cane and sugar as the price of sugar plummets? Wouldn’t you prefer to see State subsidies go into building a new bio food production sector for food security on the one hand, and for export to provide foreign currency, on the other? That is another reason you should vote for LALIT. Are you in favour that respect for the planet should take precedence over capitalist greed? That agriculture and industry, public transport should respect ecology? That pesticides, chemical fertilisers, herbicides should be replaced by ecological alternatives? If you are, that is why you should vote for LALIT. Are you in favour of more just taxation policies – more direct taxes on the rich and on profit instead of a flat tax like TVA that taxes the same rate to all, pensioners or billionaires? Then you should vote for LALIT.Are you in favour of a good public health care system for all? Are you against the privatisation of health care? If you are, this is another reason you should vote for LALIT. Do you agree that the Government should immediately publish a timetable to demolish and replace toxic asbestos housing that some 2,000 families in 56 housing estates bought from the State and are still living in? That’s  a good reason to vote for LALIT. Don’t you think the Government should open up a “Register for all people in need of housing” to get to know the real scope of the housing crisis as land becomes too expensive for ordinary people with land speculation? If you agree, vote for LALIT.If you agree that growing violence in the family goes hand in hand with job insecurity and the lack of affordable housing and that these vital questions need to be addressed, then you should vote for LALIT. Are you in favour that voluntary confession only counts if it is done in Court instead of police habitually using forced confessions to “solve” cases? Are you in favour of abolishing the system of the unique-to-Mauritius “provisional charges”system where criminal charges come first and police inquiry later? Then this is a good reason to vote for LALIT. Are you in favour of revoking the colonial ban on the Kreol language in Parliament. Then that is another reason to vote for LALIT.Are you in favour of changing the law so that electors can revoke their MP though an electoral petition to the Electoral Supervisory Commission? Are you in favour of MP’s in Parliament that we vote having more control over the executive? So that we do not get a Prime Minister with monarchial powers. Then this is another reason why you should vote for LALIT.  Are you in favour of decriminalising gandya, and controlling its sale just like cigarettes and alcohol? Of rehabilating people suffering from “hard drug” dependency rather than shoving them in prison? Of treating the drugs problem as a public health issue. Do you agree that such measures will help weaken mafia-control over our neighbourhoods? That is a good reason to vote for LALIT.Are you against capital punishment. Are you against a State department actually executing people? If you are, then you should vote for LALIT. Do you agree that the law should change so that rape and sexual assault becomes part of “assault” laws instead of being treated as a crime against “sexual morality” and that the question of consent becomes the determining factor in cases of sexual assault as in all assault in the Criminal Code? If you do, you should vote for LALIT! Are you in favour of working towards closing the military base on Diego Garcia? If yes, vote for LALIT!Do you believe Palestinian people in West Bank, Jerusalem and Gaza should stop living under military occupation? If you do, vote for LALIT!In all Constituencies, there is at least ONE LALIT candidate you can vote for.In Constituency no. 1 – Grand River North West & Port Louis West, there are THREE LALIT candidates you can vote for.In Constituency no. 10, GRSE & Montagne Blanche and in Constituency no. 16 – Vacoas/Floreal/Curepipe Rd,  there are TWO LALIT candidates you can vote for.Your vote will contribute to building a stronger opposition to Jugnauth-Ramgoolam-Berenger-Duval after the general elections. 
 Our program is based on 37 years of building popular political mobilisation and movement on a permanent basis. This is why our credibility is recognised. 
Are you in favour of using sugar estate land and the vast ocean territory of the Republic of Mauritius for employment creation, direct and indirect? If you are, this is why you should vote for LALIT.
Are you in favour of putting a STOP to destruction of sugar estate land to billionaires, of stopping the concreting over of good agricultural land with luxury villas and malls?Wouldn’t you prefer politics that channel sugar estates into food production rather than cane production with no future? Are you in favour of each sugar estate setting up factories for bio-food preservation and processing? If you are, then  you should vote for LALIT?
Are you in favour of stopping State subsidies for cane and sugar as the price of sugar plummets? Wouldn’t you prefer to see State subsidies go into building a new bio food production sector for food security on the one hand, and for export to provide foreign currency, on the other? That is another reason you should vote for LALIT. 
Are you in favour that respect for the planet should take precedence over capitalist greed? That agriculture and industry, public transport should respect ecology? That pesticides, chemical fertilisers, herbicides should be replaced by ecological alternatives? If you are, that is why you should vote for LALIT. 
Are you in favour of more just taxation policies – more direct taxes on the rich and on profit instead of a flat tax like TVA that taxes the same rate to all, pensioners or billionaires? Then you should vote for LALIT.
Are you in favour of a good public health care system for all? Are you against the privatisation of health care? If you are, this is another reason you should vote for LALIT. 
Do you agree that the Government should immediately publish a timetable to demolish and replace toxic asbestos housing that some 2,000 families in 56 housing estates bought from the State and are still living in? That’s  a good reason to vote for LALIT. 
Don’t you think the Government should open up a “Register for all people in need of housing” to get to know the real scope of the housing crisis as land becomes too expensive for ordinary people with land speculation? If you agree, vote for LALIT.
If you agree that growing violence in the family goes hand in hand with job insecurity and the lack of affordable housing and that these vital questions need to be addressed, then you should vote for LALIT. 
Are you in favour that voluntary confession only counts if it is done in Court instead of police habitually using forced confessions to “solve” cases? Are you in favour of abolishing the system of the unique-to-Mauritius “provisional charges”system where criminal charges come first and police inquiry later? Then this is a good reason to vote for LALIT. 
Are you in favour of revoking the colonial ban on the Kreol language in Parliament. Then that is another reason to vote for LALIT.
Are you in favour of changing the law so that electors can revoke their MP though an electoral petition to the Electoral Supervisory Commission? Are you in favour of MP’s in Parliament that we vote having more control over the executive? So that we do not get a Prime Minister with monarchial powers. Then this is another reason why you should vote for LALIT.  
Are you in favour of decriminalising gandya, and controlling its sale just like cigarettes and alcohol? Of rehabilating people suffering from “hard drug” dependency rather than shoving them in prison? Of treating the drugs problem as a public health issue. Do you agree that such measures will help weaken mafia-control over our neighbourhoods? That is a good reason to vote for LALIT.
Are you against capital punishment. Are you against a State department actually executing people? If you are, then you should vote for LALIT. 
Do you agree that the law should change so that rape and sexual assault becomes part of “assault” laws instead of being treated as a crime against “sexual morality” and that the question of consent becomes the determining factor in cases of sexual assault as in all assault in the Criminal Code? If you do, you should vote for LALIT! 
Are you in favour of working towards closing the military base on Diego Garcia? If yes, vote for LALIT!
Do you believe Palestinian people in West Bank, Jerusalem and Gaza should stop living under military occupation? If you do, vote for LALIT!
In all Constituencies, there is at least ONE LALIT candidate you can vote for.
In Constituency no. 1 – Grand River North West & Port Louis West, there are THREE LALIT candidates you can vote for.
In Constituency no. 10, GRSE & Montagne Blanche and in Constituency no. 16 – Vacoas/Floreal/Curepipe Rd,  there are TWO LALIT candidates you can vote for.
Your vote will contribute to building a stronger opposition to Jugnauth-Ramgoolam-Berenger-Duval after the general elections.
 

