Heading here

Kan mo t


i


 t


i


pt


i


, mo t


i


 pe res pre kot enn t


 i


 

g


arson k


i


 t


i


 ena enn



li


s
i
en k
i

 t

i

 kapav sante! L
i
s
i
en-la t

i

 apel J
ack, e b

i

ens
i
r l
i
 pa t
i
 ka

p

av sante vreman. Me li ti ka
 p

av f
er enn ta
p
az wadire li p
e sante, e 
p
ou nou bann zan
f
an, sa ti p
lis ki si
f
izan. Nou ti p
anse ki sa li inkrwayab! Enn zour, kan nou ti pe zwe avek Jack, nou 
f
in
n

m
azine ki kik
f

wa nou ka
p

av f
er enn s
p
ektak! Alor, nou ti f
abrik enn lestrad avek bwat karton

,

 e nou t
i

 vann bann t
i
ket avek tou
nou kamarad ek la

f
ami. Me, ler zour s
p
ektak-la f
inn arive, lisien 
J
ack t
i
 des
i
de k
i

 l

i

 pa anv
i
 sante. Mal
g

re tou sek
i
 nou t
i

 seye, l

i
 p

a


ti f
er enn son. Nou ti f
ini vann tou tiket, dimounn ti  p
e atann ki s

p
ektak-la koumanse, e nou ti  p
erdi nou star! ‘Ki nou  p
ou f
er?’ 
m
o kamarad f
inn dir. Li ti p
e trakase ki nou bizin kennsel s
 p
e
k

tak-la. ‘Atann enn t
i
 moman,’ mo’nn d
i
r v
i
t-v
i
t, ‘mo p
e maz
i
ne.’
Mal

g

re tou mo bann ze

f

or, mo pa ti pe reisi mazinn nanye. Mo ti
pre pou dakor ek mo kamarad, k


i

 nou b
i
z
i
n kennsel, kan mo’n
 n

g
a
g
n enn l
i
de. Petet k
i
kenn kapav pretann l
 i
mem Jack. ‘Enn top

li
de,’ l

i

’nn d
i
r mwa, ‘me akoz to’nn  g
a
g
n l
i
de-la, sa k
i
kenn-la
b

i
z
i
n tomem sa!’ Alor, de-trwa m
 i
n
i
t a
p

re, mo’nn debark kat
 p
at 
l
or lestrad-la e mo f
inn p
retann ki mo enn lisien ki ka
 p

av sante.
Telman tou d

i
mounn t

i

 p
e etra
/
mar
i

 r

iy

e, mo’nn p
anse k
i
 zame zot pou arete. 

S

pektak-la t

i

 enn gran s
i
kse. Toulezour dep
i

 sa
zour-la, d

i
mounn kr
i
ye mwa Jack, sa lot l
 i
s
i
en k
i
 kapav sante!

KOREK!
A BEGINNER’S GUIDE TO MAURITIAN  CREOLE
PAUL CHOY i4th edition: 2014 (December)
Copyright © Paul Choy 2014
1st edition: 2012 (December)
2nd edition: 2013 (October)
3rd edition: 2014 (April)
Paul Choy has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this work. All rights reserved.  No portion of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner without the prior written permission of the publisher.Acknowledgements

iiThis book would simply not have been possible without the work of the Akademi Kreol Morisien in developing the grammatical structure of the Creole language upon which this book is based.
I would like to acknowledge Dr. Arnaud Carpooran and his team for their work in producing the truly invaluable Diksioner Morisien, an essential resource for any student of Creole.
I would like to thank Nicholas Natchoo, of the Mauritian Kreol Unit of the Mauritius Institute of Education, for all his advice and support on technical aspects of the Creole language.
Lastly, I would like to acknowledge my Creole-speaking friends, who have all had to put up with my feeble attempts at learning their language.Preface

iiiIt first occurred to me to write this book after moving from the UK to Mauritius in search of a quieter lifestyle. It fascinated me that, despite English and French being the official languages of the island, an unofficial, undocumented and, outside Mauritius, largely unknown language appeared to be the island’s de facto national language, spoken by over a million inhabitants on a daily basis.
Today, Mauritian Creole is as much a living, breathing part of the daily life of Mauritius as the people who inhabit this tiny Indian Ocean island.
Creole is a wonderful language, continually changing and evolving. But, to fully appreciate it, you must first understand a little about its rich history and the place it occupies in the life of modern Mauritius.
So, here goes. Three hundred years of history in three minutes. Apologies to the people of Mauritius for my brevity; the rich history of this beautiful island deserves far more attention. But hey, that’s another book.
Although the first visitors to the island of Mauritius were Portuguese and Dutch, in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the history of Mauritian Creole didn’t begin until the arrival of French settlers at the start of the eighteenth century.
Before then, apart from the soon-to-be-extinct dodo, Mauritius was an entirely uninhabited island in the middle of the Indian Ocean. This is important to note because it explains why there is no prior indigenous language native to the island. There were no indigenous people to speak one.
Following their arrival on the island, the early settlers immediately set about creating a plantation economy based on slave labour. Within a few short decades, huge numbers of forced workers had been brought to Mauritius from their homes across Africa, Madagascar and even further afield. Soon slaves made up the majority of the population, vastly outnumbering their European owners.
As they had no common language, this newly established slave population quickly adopted French as their lingua franca (working language) in order to communicate with each other. However, with little formal education, and so few native French speakers to learn from, the slaves’ spoken French rapidly evolved as they adapted the language they heard but didn’t fully understand. Soon it became an entirely separate language; Mauritian Creole was born.
The speed with which this happened was extraordinary. Within as little as thirty years, Creole had established itself as a separate language, with its roots in French but with its own unique personality and characteristics developed and honed through daily use to allow displaced people of different origins to communicate with each other.
The controlling elite continued to speak French, and later English after sovereignty of the island passed to the British during the Napoleonic Wars, but Creole remained firmly entrenched among the working population of the island.Preface

ivLater, following the abolition of slavery in the 1830s, plantation owners were forced to bring another wave of migrants to the island to work the fields. Cheap labour from across the Indian subcontinent replaced the recently freed slaves.
Faced again with the lack of a common language and alienation from their European employers, these new arrivals also adopted Creole, enabling them to communicate with the recently formed working class of Mauritius.
Soon, even the French- and English-speaking elite started to speak Creole to communicate with the populace. And so Mauritian Creole became the nation’s language.
To this day, French and English are officially the languages of business and government, but Creole remains the language spoken every day by the people, in the homes and on the streets of Mauritius. It serves no official purpose other than allowing people from diverse cultures to communicate and interact with each other – truly a language of and for the people.
I don’t claim to speak Mauritian Creole particularly well. In fact, like you, I am still very much learning. But that is the fabulous thing about Creole: as a language that exists predominantly in its spoken form, it is very forgiving. Even as a beginner, making plenty of mistakes, you will still be understood and able to communicate.
This book was written as a result of my ongoing attempts to learn the language. It includes many of the lessons I have learned along the way, piecing together the language as best I could. Hopefully it will help you to learn, and enjoy, this rich, historic and evolving language.Official Kreol Morisien – A Note

vIn the years immediately preceding the writing of this book, the government of Mauritius undertook a project to create a standard orthography (way of writing) for the Mauritian Creole language. Ultimately this led to the publication of the Lortograf Kreol Morisien in 2011 and Gramer Kreol Morisien in 2012, both of which were intended to provide the first step towards standardisation of the written language.
Prior to this, Creole existed almost exclusively in its spoken form, with very few books or dictionaries in existence. Without a formal standard to follow, these few language resources contained significant variations between them, particularly in spelling and punctuation.
Often the same word would be spelled in many different ways across different publications, as writers decided for themselves the correct word form to use.
Throughout this book I have endeavoured to comply with the new official standard, as well as to use spelling consistent with the second edition of the Diksioner Morisien (anyone serious about learning Creole should definitely obtain a copy of this excellent book). However, readers should also be aware that, as a result of complying with the official orthography of Mauritian Creole, differences might occur between the word forms used here and in other books written before the publication of this new standard. 1Introduction

I bet you can’t guess what the Mauritian Creole word for  snail is?
In fairness, as this is a beginner’s guide to the language, I’d say it’s a pretty safe bet you don’t know, so let me tell you. It’s kourpa, the literal translation of which means can’t run. So, in Mauritan Creole, a snail is a can’t run!
How fabulous is that?
And it makes complete sense, when you stop and think about it. After all, have you ever seen a snail that could run?
Creole is jammed full of little gems like kourpa, all of which help to give the language its incredible personality, something I hope this book will help you discover for yourself.
But, before we get into any of that, let me get one thing out of the way straight away. This book is not going to teach you how to speak Mauritian Creole fluently. You don’t learn to speak Mauritian Creole from a book. You learn by actually opening your mouth and speaking the language. So, instead, this book is going to teach you how to learn Creole.
So what’s the difference?
Well, consider this. If I do my job right, the end of this book will mark the start of your journey to really learning the language. Throughout this book I am going to give you the basic tools to help you hold a conversation in Creole. This book won’t teach you everything there is to know about the language, but you will be able to comfortably converse on almost any subject you like, which will allow you to continue your learning on your own. And this means diving in at the deep end.
You see, more than any language I have experienced (and I have learned a few), Creole is not a language for the shy. Forget locking yourself away in a room somewhere quiet, far from anyone who might hear you making a mistake, whilst you follow a mindless ‘listen and repeat’ distance-learning course.
With Mauritian Creole, you need to really get stuck in and immerse yourself in the language. And that means actually talking – to real human beings – who will invariably speak back to you. Yes, your foreign accent or mispronunciation of words may raise a smile or two, but that’s all part of the fun of learning a new language.
This book is written from the point of view of a native English speaker learning Mauritian Creole and assumes no prior knowledge of any language other than English. If you already have some languagelearning experience, then no doubt it will help your journey with Creole. But equally, if you are starting from absolute scratch, this book will take you step by step through everything you need to know. 2Introduction

spending time looking at why tenses such as the ‘past progressive’ or ‘conditional’ are constructed in a particular way, we will simply consider how to say I was doing something or if I could do something. After all, most of us don’t know what these tenses are in English let alone another language.
You will find that this is very much a book of two parts. The first part will introduce you to the structure of the language, and I have deliberately chosen to keep the number of new words to an absolute minimum.
All the vocabulary used in this first part is recapped elsewhere in the book, so don’t worry too much about learning all these new words as you make your way through part one. Instead, focus your energy on learning the basic structure of the language so it begins to feel natural to you.
Throughout this book, anything written in the Creole language will appear in bold italics, whereas English translations will be in italics. There are also various language, grammar and pronunciation tips to help you  gain a greater understanding.
Part two contains a comprehensive English–Kreol vocabulary list with more than enough words to help you become perfectly conversant in Mauritian Creole. Feel free to knock yourself out learning all of these later, once you have an understanding of the language. Most important, however, is for you to remember to have fun with Creole. Because it is not burdened with the rigid structure of other languages, it’s a wonderfully expressive tongue with its own unique style and character. You’re going to love it!
So, are you ready to begin?Contents

3
Chapter Five:  It’s all getting a  bit tenseChapter Four:  Dialogue 1Chapter Three:  Progressing
 P48
 P36
P28
Chapter Two:  Filling GapsChapter One:  First StepsPart One:  Language Guide
 P19
 P5
P4

Chapter Eight:  A Story (in Creole)Chapter Seven: Dialogue 2Chapter Six:  Quirky Creole
 P73
 P65
P55

And FinallyEnglish–Kreol  Vocabulary ListPart Two:  English–Kreol  Vocabulary List
P77
 P80
 P79Heading here


4
Part One:  Language Guide 5Heading here


Chapter One:  First Steps 6Chapter One: First Steps

Me, myself and I
Mo.
Congratulations! You have just learned your first Mauritian Creole word: mo, meaning I. See, that wasn’t hard, was it?
Every sentence in Creole, and every other language for that matter, is made up using a combination of different types of words. Just like building blocks, each word builds upon another to create a sentence. The very first of these blocks we are going to learn about is ‘personal pronouns’ – words that describe a person, such as you, he, she, it and so on. Let’s get stuck in straight away.
Singular personal pronouns
mo – I
mwa – me
to – you (informal)
ou – you (formal)
twa – you (objective)
li – he / she / him / her / it

 Pronunciation Tip
These personal pronouns are pronounced more or less as you would expect. However, the o sound is more extended than in English, so mo becomes mow. To becomes tow. Ou is a little trickier, though, sounding like a longer ooo.
One of the first things you might have noticed about these pronouns is that there are both informal and formal versions of the word you. This idea might be unfamiliar to you if, like me, you are a native English speaker, as it stems from Creole’s French roots.
Which version you use depends on the situation. Generally the informal to version would be used with friends, family and people younger than yourself. The more formal ou would be used to address people you don’t know so well, such as someone you have only met once or twice, or acquaintances that you know, but not on a personal basis.
Getting your head around which version to use can be a little tricky at first, but perhaps a good way of understanding it is something I call the ‘party rule’. It goes something like this. 7Chapter One: First Steps

Everyone else would be ou. This simple rule isn’t an exact illustration, but it will definitely serve to get you going.
You also might be wondering what the ‘objective’ version of you is for. You’d use this when describing someone as the object of a sentence rather than the subject; for example, Shall I go with you? (where I is the subject and you is the object). In English we use the same word, but in Creole it’s different.
You will notice that the words for he, she, him, her and it are all the same: li. Having a single word for all of these certainly makes learning vocabulary easier – yay! But it also means that attention has to be paid to the context the words are used in to be clear about the intended meaning – boo!
So far we have looked only at the singular personal pronouns, those used to address one person at a time. But what about words to address groups of people, such as we, us and the plural you? These are known as ‘plural personal pronouns’.
Plural personal pronouns
nou – we, us
zot – you (plural)
zot – they, them
bann-la – they, them
Again, you can see that the same word can be used for multiple meanings, such as nou for we and us. This is a regular occurrence in Creole. Unlike English, with its huge vocabulary of words, Creole is a much smaller language, with many words having multiple meanings. This means you need to infer the correct meaning in the context of the sentence as a whole.
Bann-la is often (but not always) used in situations where there could be confusion between zot meaning the plural you (a group of people) and zot meaning them (a different group of people). For example, in a sentence such as can you [plural] wait with them?
It’s also worth mentioning that there is one more type of personal pronoun commonly used in Mauritian Creole, ‘reflexive pronouns’. These are used to refer back to the subject; for example, in myself, himself and themselves.
Reflexive personal pronouns
momem – myself
numem – ourselves
tomem – yourself (informal)
oumem – yourself (formal)
zotmem – themselves
bann-la-mem – themselves 8Chapter One: First Steps

You will note these pronouns are formed by adding the suffix mem (which means same) to the pronoun, so to (you) becomes tomem (yourself).
Collectively, these three types of personal pronoun are the first of our blocks for building a sentence, as they enable us to start identifying the subject of a sentence.

 Language Tip
The suffix -mem is used a lot in Creole, and in ways that we wouldn’t normally expect to see in English. For example, you might hear it being added to the word la, meaning there, to become lamem or there the same. Although this doesn’t really make sense in English, in Creole it is used as a means of bringing emphasis. So something isn’t just there, it’s there.
Don’t be surprised to hear -mem reduced to -em. Spoken Creole is often heavily abbreviated, so la-mem will most often be heard as la-em.
The doing words
By far the most important of the sentence building blocks are verbs – words that describe some sort of action or occurrence. Verbs make things happen, and without them there would be nothing to talk about in Creole.
Before we get into how verbs are used within the Creole language, first let me share with you some great news: Creole verbs do not need to be conjugated!
Anyone who has ever learned a foreign language will remember the horror that is verb conjugation, where the form of the verb changes depending on when, what or to whom it is being applied. Memories of trying to learn many different versions of the same word come flooding back – I have but she has, I go but he goes and so on.
In Creole there is none of this. A verb is the verb for everyone and everything. And this makes life so much easier. Hooray!
Unlike in English, however, the verb does change depending on its relationship with other words. Where the verb can be used on its own, or appears at the end of a sentence, the ‘full form’ is used. But, where the verb is followed by another verb, or relates to an object, an abbreviated version of the verb is used, the ‘short form’.
There are three types of Creole verbs. They are grouped together based on how their short forms are created. I am sure there is a fancy name for each of these groups, but I call them the ‘normal’, ‘odd’ and ‘odder’ verbs. 9Chapter One: First Steps

To try and understand how to create these long and short forms, let’s learn our very first verb.
ale – to go
This is the long form of a ‘normal’ verb. What makes it normal is that we can create its short form simply by chopping off the last letter, e, to create al.
 Long form / short form
ale / al
In Creole, the vast majority of verbs follow this pattern, which means we can create their short forms in exactly the same way. So let’s have a look at some other normal verbs in their long and short forms.
Long form / short form – meaning
koze / koz – to speak or to talk
manze / manz – to eat
gete / get – to look (at)
panse / pans – to think
trouve / trouv – to see or to find

 Pronunciation Tip
In Creole, words and verbs that end with the letter e are pronounced with an -ay sound rather than the -ee sound that many English-speakers would more naturally use.
So ale would be pronounced alay, koze is pronounced kozay, manze is manzay and so on.
So far so good!
There are a few commonly used verbs, though, that do not use this standard format of just chopping off the last letter. I call these ‘odd’ verbs. Fortunately for us, there aren’t many of them. Some of the more often used are:
Long form / short form – meaning
fini / finn – to finish
vini / vinn – to come
dimande / demann – to ask 10Chapter One: First Steps

vande / vann – to sell
tande / tann – to hear
OK, so that’s the normal and odd verbs dealt with. What about the ‘odder’ verbs? These are verbs that have the same long and short forms. As there is nothing in particular to help us recognise which verbs fall into this category, they all just have to be learned. Here are some of the more common odder verbs (a full list can be found in the English–Kreol vocabulary list at the end of this book):
Long form / short form – meaning
perdi / perdi – to lose
kapav / kapav – to be able
pran / pran – to take

 Grammar Tip
Understanding when to use the long or the short form of a verb can be tricky at first. Remember,  the long form of the verb is always used unless another verb, person or object follows it, in which case the short form is used. To understand this structure better, consider the following examples:
I will eat.
I will eat later.
I will eat pizza later.
In the first example, the long form of the verb manze, meaning to eat, would be used as it appears at the end of the sentence and therefore cannot be followed by a verb or relate to a person or object.
The second example would also use the long form of the verb, because another verb, person or object doesn’t follow it.
In the third example, however, the short form manz would be used, because now an object, pizza, follows it.
Don’t worry if this seems a little daunting at first. With practice, understanding when to use the long or short forms of verbs will begin to feel quite natural.
There is actually one other type of verb: ‘supportive verbs’ (technically called ‘modal auxiliary verbs’, but ‘supportive’ makes more sense to me). These are verbs that directly support another verb to give meaning. So, in the sentence I want to go, the word want is the supportive verb, working in conjunction with the verb go. As supportive verbs are often used in conjunction with other verbs, they only have one form. Some examples are: 11Chapter One: First Steps

oule – want
anvi – would like to, feel like
bizin – must
Putting it together
I mentioned earlier that speaking Creole is simply a matter of putting together the building blocks of the language to form sentences. Now we have two blocks in place, we can do just that and form our very first sentence. Shall we have a go?
Mo koze – I speak
OK, I admit, it’s a very simple sentence, but, when first learning Creole, simple is usually all you need. To create this sentence we took the personal pronoun mo and added it to the verb koze.
We can use exactly the same method to create some other sentences.
Mo ale – I go
Li manze – He eats or She eats or It eats  (depending on context)
To panse – You think
Zot tande – You (plural) hear or They hear  (depending on context)
You see how easy it is to begin speaking Creole? So far, though, we have only used the long form of the verb. How about creating a sentence using the short form?
Mo koz Kreol – I speak Creole
If you recall, a verb’s short form is used when it is followed by another verb or directly relates to something, which in this case is Creole. So koze became koz.
At the moment we don’t have any other words to add to our sentence, so let’s introduce a couple more basic vocabulary words to get us going.
laplaz – beach
kiksoz – something
Now, with just a few more words we can build upon our sentences.
To tann kiksoz? – You hear something?
Li al laplaz – He (or she or it) goes to the beach
Mo trouv twa – I see you 12Chapter One: First Steps

Can you see how easy it is to form simple sentences, just by building one language block onto another? And, by combining these blocks of language in all sorts of different ways, we can create more complex sentences.
Mo kapav trouv twa – I can see you
Li anvi al laplaz – He (or she or it) would like to go to  the beach
To oule ale? – You want to go?
All we did here was add another language block, this time some supportive verbs, to build a more detailed sentence. Are you getting the hang of when to use the long and short forms of the verbs?

 Pronunciation Tip
In everyday use, the verb oule is often abbreviated to ’le. So don’t be surprised if you hear to oule shortened to to’le, mo oule to mo’le and so on.
Interrogative words
So far we have learned about two of the essential building blocks used to create sentences in Creole: personal pronouns and verbs. But, before we move on to the other elements of the language, there is one more building block to look at: interrogative words used to ask questions.
As you might expect, there are as many words to ask a question as there are questions to be asked, but a few of the main interrogatives will cover all we are likely to need. Let’s have a look at some of the important ones.
ki – what, who, whom
ki sann-la – who (when asking a direct question)
kifer – why
kan – when
kot – where
kouma – how
komie – how much, how many
Forming a sentence as a question is as simple as starting that sentence with one of these interrogatives.
To kapav trouv – You can see
Ki to kapav trouv? – What can you see?
To ale – You go
Kot to ale? – You go where? 13Chapter One: First Steps

Li fini – It finishes
Kan li fini – When does it finish?
Besides the use of interrogatives, there are two other ways to form a question.
The first, and by far the easiest, is simply raising your voice at the end of the sentence. So the statement to ale (you go) becomes the question to ale? (you go?). Alternatively the word eski, derived from the French est-ce que, can be placed before a statement to turn it into a question. So, once again, to ale becomes eski to ale?
Numbers and counting
Learning to count is a fundamental component of speaking any foreign language, and it seems the perfect way to close this first chapter on Mauritian Creole.
As Creole is derived from French, the numbering system used is almost exactly what you might remember from any childhood French lessons you took. The only difference is the pronunciation, which has led to the Creole dialect having different spellings from French.
one – enn
two – de
three – trwa
four – kat
five – sink
six – sis
seven – set
eight – wit
nine – nef
ten – dis
eleven – onz
twelve – douz
thirteen – trez
fourteen – katorz
fifteen – kinz
sixteen – sez
seventeen – diset
eighteen – dizwit
nineteen – diznef
twenty – vin
twenty-one – vint-e-enn
twenty-two – vennde
twenty-three – venntrwa
twenty-four – vennkat 14Chapter One: First Steps

twenty-five – vennsink
twenty-six – vennsis
twenty-seven – vennset
twenty-eight – vintwit
twenty-nine – vintnef
thirty – trant
forty – karannt
fifty – sinkant
sixty – swasant
seventy – swasanntdis
eighty – katrovin
ninety – katrovin-dis
one hundred – san
one thousand – mil
one million – enn milyon

 Pronunciation Tip
There are a couple of numbers with slightly tricky pronunciation in Creole. English-speakers in particular need to watch out for numbers containing a five or an eight.
The i in sink is actually pronounced more like an English a, so the number five is pronounced sank. The same applies to the number fifteen, which is pronounced kanz, and twenty-five, which is pronounced vann sank.
The i in wit makes an ee sound. So the number eight sounds like weet and the number eighteen sounds like deesweet.
Also, don’t forget that the e in de means that the number two is pronounced day.
As you can see, the numbering system is pretty straightforward. That’s the good news. The bad news is that there are no shortcuts to learning how to count in Creole. Unfortunately it’s just a matter of learning the numbers by heart.
Thirty-one, forty-one and fifty-one are formed the same way as twenty-one, simply by adding -e-enn. So trant-e-enn, karant-e-enn, sinkant-e-enn respectively. 15Chapter One: First Steps

has been added. So, following this logic, ninety-one is ‘eighty eleven’ or katrovin-onz, seventy-two is swasanndouz and so on.
Practice makes perfect, as they say, so now might be the perfect time to start counting sheep in Creole… 16Chapter one pop quiz

Q. Which form of the verb should be used in this sentence?
Mo _____ laplaz.
a: ale
b: al
Q. Adding which of the following words changes the sentence zot demande, meaning they ask, to they must ask?
a: bizin
b: ’le
c: manze
Q. Which personal pronoun can be used to extend the previous sentence even further, to they must ask them?
a: bann-la
b: to
c: zot
Q. Following on from the sentence above, which form of the verb should be used in the sentence they must ask them?
a: dimande
b: dimann
Q. Which of the following is the correct written form of the number 476?
a: kat san swasannsez
b: kat mil swasannsez
c: kat san swasannsis
Q. Which form of the verb should be used in this sentence? 17Chapter one pop quiz answers

Mo al laplaz.
a: 
ale 
b: al  ✔
As the verb in this sentence, ale, meaning to go, directly refers to an object, laplaz, the short form, should be used.
Q. Adding which of the following words changes the sentence zot demande, meaning they ask, to they must ask?
a: bizin ✔
b: 
’le

c: manze

The supportive verb bizin means must. So the full sentence would be zot bizin demande.
Q. Which personal pronoun can be used to extend the previous sentence even further, to they must ask them?
a: bann-la ✔
b: 
to

c: zot

This is actually a bit of a trick question. Both zot and bann-la could be used, as they are both plural personal pronouns for they or them. However, bann-la would most likely be used in a sentence like this to avoid confusion with the first zot, meaning they.  Q. Following on from the sentence above, which form of the verb should be used in the sentence they must ask them?
a: 
dimande

b: dimann ✔
The sentence started out as zot bizin dimande, meaning they must ask. However, as a result of adding bann-la, the verb is now followed by a reference to people, so the short form of the verb should be used instead. The full sentence is therefore zot bizin dimann bann-la. 18Chapter one pop quiz answers

Q. Which of the following is the correct written form of the number 476?
a: kat san swasannsez ✔
b: 
kat mil swasannsez

c: kat san swasannsis

The correct answer is kat san swasannsez.
The word mil refers to thousands rather than hundreds, so the number used in answer b is 4076. Answer c looks very similar to the correct answer, but it actually means 466. Remember the literal translation of the number seventy in Creole is ‘sixty ten’, so seventy-six would be ‘sixty-sixteen’, which is why we need sez, meaning sixteen, rather than sis, meaning six. 19Heading here


Chapter Two:  Filling Gaps 20Chapter two: Filling gaps

A, an and the
In chapter one we looked at some of the major building blocks of the Creole language. Although understanding these important blocks will greatly help towards our goal of speaking conversational Creole, we are also going to need plenty of filler words to hold the blocks together.
This means learning about all the little words, such as a, the and an, that bring meaning to the sentences we speak. These kinds of words are often the ones we take for granted when speaking in English.
Most languages have a type of word called an ‘article’. This is a little word that is attached to another to reference that word. So, we don’t generally say child; instead we might say the child. Similarly, instead of apple, we might say an apple.
In English there are two types of article: a and an are known as ‘indefinite articles’ and the is the ‘definite article’ (don’t worry, that’s as detailed as we’re going to get about English grammar!). In Creole, the indefinite article is enn and the definite article is la.
Before we can make use of these articles, though, we are going to need some words to reference. So, here are a few more words, along with the indefinite article, for you to add to your vocabulary list.
liv (enn liv) – book (a book)
tifi (enn tifi) – girl (a girl)
garson (enn garson) – boy (a boy)
banann (enn banann) – banana (a banana)
Unlike English, where there are two versions of the indefinite article (a and an), in Creole, enn is used for everything, which keeps things nice and simple for us mere students of the language.

 Grammar Tip
As you learned above, enn actually means one, so one apple and an apple are the same thing in Creole.
The definite article, la, is also used for everything. However, its use differs in one major way from English (and French for that matter). In Creole, the definite article always comes after the word. So, a literal translation of the book would be book the.
Let’s have a look at the words we learned above along with their definite articles.
liv-la – the book
tifi-la – the girl 21Chapter two: Filling gaps

garson-la – the boy
banann-la – the banana
As you can see, the definite article takes up its peculiar position after the word it’s supposed to be referencing. I told you Creole has its own unique character!
Just say no
In Creole, there are a number of special words called ‘language markers’ that are used to latch onto a word or phrase to effect some kind of change of meaning or state. By themselves these markers don’t mean anything until they are used with another word.

 Grammar Tip
Use of grammatical markers is really important in Creole. They are used for everything from distinguishing between singular and plural items to forming tenses. Understanding how to correctly place these markers will greatly improve your ability to communicate in the language.
Forming the negative in Creole is achieved in just this way, by placing the negative marker pa in front of the relevant verb. Let’s have a go at putting this into action by looking at these simple sentences.
Mo koz Kreol – I speak Creole
Mo pa koz Kreol – I don’t speak Creole
Mo tann li – I hear it
Mo pa tann li – I can’t hear it
Mo kapav trouv twa – I can see you
Mo pa kapav trouv twa – I can’t see you
As you can see, in each of these sentences, the negative marker pa has been placed before the verb to change its meaning to the negative.
You may notice, though, that the last sentence also includes the supportive verb kapav. This extends the sentence from I see you to I can see you. Where a supportive verb is used with another verb, the negative marker is placed before both of them to form the negative.
Ena and pena 22Chapter two: Filling gaps

English counterparts.
Ena means there is, there are or have, and pena is the negative (pena is an abbreviated version of pa ena, so this word actually uses the negative marker we just looked at).
So, now we know how to use these new words, we can incorporate them into some simple sentences.
Ena enn tifi – There is one girl
Pena bannan – There are no bananas
Mo pena enn liv, mo ena trwa – I don’t have one book,  I have three
Be aware, though, that there will be a temptation to see these words as Creole equivalents of the verb to have. However, their meanings are more wide ranging, the value of which will become more and more apparent as you use them in practice.
One is good but more is better
The Creole language uses plurals to indicate the existence of more than one of something. More often than not, a plural can simply be inferred from the context of the sentence, for example:
Mo ena boukou soz – I have a lot of things
This sentence introduces two new words that we haven’t come across before: boukou, meaning many or lots, and soz, meaning thing. In normal use soz would refer to a single item, but in this sentence we can infer the plural because it is preceded by the word for many.
Where the plural can’t be inferred, though, we can use another marker, this time the plural marker bann. This is placed before whichever word we want to make plural.
Mo ena bann soz – I have things
As you can see, this is very similar to the previous sentence. However, in the absence of the word boukou to infer that there is more than one thing, we need the plural marker bann instead. Care must be taken not to overuse bann, however, as often the plural will be assumed.
Well that’s odd!
A very odd thing happened along the way as Creole evolved from its French roots. Many of the words that would go on to become common within Creole permanently fused with their original French definite article to create a new word. 23Chapter two: Filling gaps

the end of this new ‘fused’ word to make latab-la, meaning the table in Creole.
Some other words that experienced the same journey are:
latet – head
lisien – dog
lakle – key
lame – hand
lane – year
Throw-overs from the original language like these really show the evolution of Creole, and are one of the reasons I find it so fascinating to learn.
Everyday words
Learning a foreign language requires an investment of time to pick up the big concepts, the foundation stones that make up the language. But often just a few little everyday words are all you need to start building your first rudimentary sentences. The resulting sentences may not be pretty but they will be good enough for you to be understood.
So, before we get too bogged down with big concepts, here are ten everyday words that you will use all the time in Creole.
wi – yes
non – no
e – and
ek or ar – with
me – but
si – if
sa – that
isi – here
lor – on
dan – in, within

 Learning Tip
When you first set out to learn a language, one of the biggest challenges is remembering enough vocabulary to be able to hold a conversation. But there is one really simple way to learn even the most obscure words. It’s called ‘visualisation’ and involves creating a mental picture to illustrate the word. 24Chapter two: Filling gaps

 Take, for example, the Creole word robine, meaning tap (or faucet for our American friends). To help me remember this word, I created a mental image of a robin redbreast bird sitting on a tap and saying ‘eh!’
Or how about the word for hammer, marto. I think this word sounds a bit like tomato, so I picture a tomato being squashed by a hammer (poor tomato – it doesn’t help that I always give him a little face!).
Why not try this for yourself? The Creole word for wet is mouye, pronounced moo-yay. Can you create your own mental picture to help you remember this word? I bet you can’t do it without a cow being in there somewhere! 25Chapter two pop quiz

Q. Which is the correct translation of The girl has some books?
a: Bann tifi ena liv-la
b: Tifi-la ena bann liv
c: Tifi-la pena bann liv
Q. What does ki ete sa, lor laplaz-la? mean?
a: Who’s that, on the beach?
b: Is it on the beach?
c: What’s that, on the beach?
Q. What does ou pa kapav mean?
a: You can
b: You cannot
Q. What is the correct translation of I cannot see the dogs in Creole?
________________________________________________
Q. How could the question Why must we go? be asked in Creole?
________________________________________________ 26Chapter two pop quiz answers

Q. Which is the correct translation of the girl has some books?
a: 
Bann tifi ena liv-la

b: Tifi-la ena bann liv ✔
c: 
Tifi-la pena bann liv

If you recall, the definite article the in Creole is la. So the girl would be tifi-la. In order to indicate that she has some books (plural) rather than a book (singular), the plural marker bann may be used before the word for book, liv.
As we have already learned, ena means there is, there are or have. So, answer b, Tifi-la ena bann liv, is the correct Creole translation of the girl has some books.
In answer a, the placement of the plural marker bann before the word for girl makes it plural (girls), whereas the use of the definite article la with liv translates as the book. Therefore, the translation of answer a is actually the girls (plural) have the book.
Anyone who takes only a quick glance at answer c might be forgiven for believing it correct, but take a look again and the word pena instead of ena may pop out. Pena is of course the negative of ena, which consequently means the sentence actually translates to the girl does not have some books.
Incidentally, tifi-la ena liv would also be an acceptable translation of the girl has some books. As mentioned in this chapter, the plural marker bann should not be overused as often plural will be assumed from the context.
Q. What does ki ete sa, lor laplaz-la? mean?
a: Who’s that, on the beach?

b: Is it on the beach?

c: What’s that, on the beach? ✔
Although the interrogative ki can be used for either what or who, you will recall from chapter one that ki sann-la is used in questions about who has taken a particular action. As a result, we can infer that this question does not refer to a person, so the correct answer is What’s that, on the beach?
Q. What does ou pa kapav mean?
a: You can

b: You cannot  ✔
The key word here is pa, the negative marker in the Creole language. Its existence in this short sentence signifies a change from can, kapav, to cannot, pa kapav. 27Chapter two pop quiz answers

Q. What is the correct translation of I cannot see the dogs in Creole?
Mo pa kapav trouv bann lisien
To formulate this sentence we need to put into practice a number of the elements of the Creole language that should be familiar from the first two chapters. The use of the negative and plural markers pa and bann is important in this sentence in terms of ensuring that the correct meaning is communicated.
Q. How could the question Why must we go? be asked in Creole?
Kifer nou bizin ale?
This simple question uses the interrogative kifer, meaning why, to turn the statement we must go into a question.
It’s interesting to note that, by simply changing the interrogative, we can create a number of other questions from the same statement, such as:
Kan nou bizin ale? – When must we go?
Kot nou bizin ale? – Where must we go? 28Heading here


Chapter Three:  Progressing 29Chapter Three: Progressing

Getting in tense
Life would be very confusing without the concept of time. It is what enables us to coordinate events and actions in our lives. In language, grammatical tenses are used to give these events a time context, locating them in the now, the past or the future.
It may not have been immediately obvious, but we have actually already experienced our first tense, called the ‘simple present’. This tense was used throughout the first two chapters to form sentences describing events in the present, such as mo koze, I talk.
But, to engage in an active Creole conversation, we need to be able to break free from the confines of the simple here and now. So, let’s extend our range by looking at three more tenses:
- The ‘progressive present’ tense, used for ongoing events in the present: I am doing.
- The ‘simple future’ tense, used for actions or events yet to occur: I am going to do.
- The ‘simple past’ tense, used for events that have already occurred: I did.
Although each of these new tenses places events at different times, they are all formed in exactly the same way, by using the language markers pe, pou or ti, respectively. Which tense is being employed is signalled by which marker is used. Here are a few simple sentences we can now build using these new markers.
Mo koze – I speak
Mo pe koze – I am speaking
Mo pou koze – I am going to speak
Mo ti koze – I spoke
Mo ale – I go
Mo pe ale – I am going
Mo pou ale – I am going to go
Mo ti ale – I went

 Pronunciation Tip
Remember, in Creole, words that end in -e are pronounced -ay. So, the progressive marker, pe, is pronounced pay.
Forming each of these tenses is not difficult; it is simply a matter of placing the appropriate marker in front of the verb. 30Chapter Three: Progressing

future, it can also mean for. And, whereas ti is used as a marker for something in the past, it is also the word for small. Don’t be surprised if you start tying yourself up in knots around about now, trying to work out the various meanings of words or how to form tenses. Speaking a new language often leaves your tongue needing to play catch-up with your brain whilst trying to work out  what to say. This is totally normal and just takes practice – I did warn you Creole is a language for speaking!
Mixing it up
So far we have looked at how our various language markers can be used to change the context of verbs or words. However, sometimes markers can be put together to create ‘combination markers’. By combining markers, we can achieve greater meaning than by using them alone. So, by placing ti, the simple past marker, with pe, the progressive marker, we create a new combination marker, ti pe. This marker signifies an ongoing event but in the past.
Mo ti koze – I spoke
Mo pe koze – I am speaking
Mo ti pe koze – I was speaking
The ti marker places this action in the past, but the addition of the pe marker tells us it was also ongoing. Using the two markers together allows us to make use of the properties of both.
Let’s have a look at another combination marker, this time  ti pou, which indicates something conditional (I would,  but ...) or something that was going to happen but didn’t (I was going to, but …).
Mo ti koze – I spoke
Mo pou koze – I am going to speak
Mo ti pou koze – I would speak (but …)
Mo ti pou koze – I was going to speak (but …)
To give this combination marker a context, let’s have a look at using it in some full sentences.
Mo ti pou manze, me mo bizin ale –  I would eat, but I have to go
 Mo ti pou ale, me mo pa kapav –  I was going to go, but I can’t
As you can see, this is a more complex sentence, but it doesn’t include anything we haven’t already learned. 31Chapter Three: Progressing

 Learning Tip
Don’t worry about trying to grasp this all at once. Learning how to use all these language markers will take time. Rather, think of this whole section as a point of reference. Review it often to help you develop your understanding over time.
To be or not to be
If there is a single aspect of the Creole language guaranteed to get English-speakers scratching their heads in bewilderment, it’s surely this:
There is no verb to be!
The likes of I am, you are and so on just don’t exist. Instead, a number of little structures serve for each situation where the verb to be would be used in English.
One such situation uses the word ete. This word is derived from the French verb être, meaning to be, so in a sense it means to be. But not quite, and not always. Unlike être, its use is limited to asking or describing where someone (or something) is, was or will be.
Kot ou ete? – Where are you?
Kot ou ti ete? – Where were you?
Kot ou pou ete? – Where will you be?
OK, so far none of this causes too much of a headache. But let’s have a look at the replies to these questions, and their literal translations.
Mo isi – I here (in the present)
Mo ti isi – I here (in the past)
Mo pou isi – I here (in the future)
As you can see, any sign of the verb to be has simply disappeared – no am, was or will be. Confusing, isn’t it!
Forming the negatives of these sentences is as simple as adding the negative marker, pa. So, whereas ou pou isi means you will be here, ou pa pou isi means you won’t be here.
Hopefully, by now, you will have started to realise that learning to speak Creole is not a matter of just learning a bunch of Creole words and using them as you would in English. Creole has its own personality, which means it behaves differently from English in many ways. Don’t worry, though – you will find, with practice, this personality will quickly start to feel natural.
Another word that can be substituted for some of the functions of the verb to be is se, meaning it is. 32Chapter Three: Progressing

Se enn liv – It’s a book
Se pou mwa – It’s for me (it’s mine)
Se mo garson ki ti fer li – It was my son who did it
Collectively, these substitutes do not constitute the verb to be; they simply replace some of the functions of the verb.

 Pronunciation Tip
Remember, although the word se ends in -e, it is not pronounced say, as you might expect, but rather seh. The reason is that only verbs ending in -e are pronounced -ay, and se is not a verb.
More everyday words
Now that we have learned how to provide a reference in time for events and situations, let’s add some time-based everyday words, which will help us in building these types of sentences.
zordi – today
yer – yesterday
demin – tomorrow
gramatin – early morning
matin – morning
lapremidi – afternoon
aswar – evening
lanwit – night
bonzour – hello
orevwar – goodbye 33Chapter three pop quiz

Q. Select the answer that places the language markers in the correct order for the following sentences:
Yer, mo _____ koze. Zordi, mo _____ koze. Demin, mo _____ koze.
a: pou, ti, pe
b: pou, pe, ti
c: ti, pe, pou
Q. Select the correct translation of the following sentence:
Kot to ti pe ale?
a: Where were you going?
b: Where are you going?
c: When are you going?
Q. What is the correct translation of the sentence I will be here tomorrow?
________________________________________________
Q. How can the sentence Kan to pou vinn isi?, meaning When will you come here?, be changed to mean When did you come here?
Q. What does Mo ti bizin koz ar li mean?
a: I needed to talk with him.
b: I am going to talk with him.
c: I would have spoken with him. 34Chapter three pop quiz answers

Q. Select the answer that places the language markers in the correct order for the following sentences:
Yer, mo _____ koze. Zordi, mo _____ koze. Demin, mo _____ koze.
a: 
pou, ti, pe

b: pou, pe, ti

c: ti, pe, pou ✔
The clues to answering this question are the words yer, zordi and demin, meaning yesterday, today and tomorrow respectively. Knowing this allows us to establish the correct order of markers as ti, pe and pou, which are the past, progressive present and future markers. Answer c is therefore correct.
Q. Select the correct translation of the following sentence:
Kot to ti pe ale?
a: Where were you going? ✔
b: Where are you going?

c: When are you going?

This sentence uses the ti pe combination marker, which signifies an ongoing action in the past. As answer a is the only answer in the past, it must be correct.
Incidentally, Kot to pou ale? and Kan to pou ale? are the translations of answers b and c respectively. Both are set in the future, so the simple future marker pou is used. However, whereas answer b asks where (kot), answer c asks when (kan).
Q. What is the correct translation of the sentence I will be here tomorrow?
Mo pou la demin
This sentence is not as difficult to translate as it might have first appeared. Remember, in this context there is no verb to be; it is simply inferred. So we simply need to state I here tomorrow and place that event in the future with the future marker, pou.
The sentence Mo pou isi demin would also be correct; however, in practice Mo pou la demin would more generally be used.
Q. How can the sentence Kan to pou vinn isi?, meaning When will you come here?, be changed to mean When did you come here? 35Chapter three pop quiz answers

the past marker, ti, which places the event in the past. The rest of the sentence remains exactly the same, so the correct answer is Kan to ti vinn isi?
Q. What does Mo ti bizin koz ar li mean?
a: I needed to talk with him. ✔
b: I am going to talk with him.

c: I would have spoken with him.

Again, the key to this answer is when the event occurred. In this question, the past marker ti really stands out. It tells us that answer b cannot be correct as it is in the future.
You might have been tempted to answer c, but that answer would have needed the ti pou marker, which signifies something that would have been done but wasn’t.
In this case, using the ti marker turns the verb bizin, meaning to need, into the past tense, needed, which leaves us with the correct answer, a. 36Heading here


Chapter Four:  Dialogue 1 37Chapter Four: Dialogue 1

John and Sarah
So far we have only taken an artificial look at Creole, learning about small pieces of grammar and vocabulary in isolation from the rest of the language. But Creole doesn’t work like this. It exists to be spoken, which is when it really comes alive.
To truly gain an insight into the language, we need to see it in context. So let’s have a look at some real-life dialogue, as spoken by Sarah and John, two friends who have just bumped into each other. Don’t worry about how much you understand – we’re going to break it all down in a minute.

Sarah: Hi John. How’s it going?
John: Good, thanks. And you?
Sarah: Pretty good. Hey, I have a surprise for you.
John: What’s that?
 Sarah: Mo pe aprann koz Kreol Morisien.
John: Huh? To koz Kreol aster?
Sarah: Wi, enn tigit. Mo pe aprann depi twa mwa.
John: Mari bon sa! Kouma to trouv li, fasil ouswa dificil?
Sarah:Toulede! Gramer-la plis fasil ki Angle, me mo gagn difikilte pou rapel tou bann mo.  Sak fwa mo aprann enn nouvo mo, mo bliye enn lot.
John: Me to koz li bien!
Sarah: Pankor! Mo bizin pratike. Mo sir mo pe fer boukou fot kan mo koze!
John: Pa trakase. Bizin fer bann fot pou aprann. Avek pratike, biento to pou kapav koz kouma  enn Morisien!
Sarah: Mo espere! Mo mari kontan ki mo kapav koz ar mo bann kamarad an Kreol.
John: Hey, ki to pe fer aster? Mo pou pran enn kafe ar Andrew. To anvi vinn zwenn li ek mwa?  Li pou gagn enn mari sirpriz ki to kapav koz nou langaz!
Sarah: Mo ti pou al kot mwa, me kitfwa mo kapav vinn enn kou.
John: Top. To ena to loto anplace? Ouswa to anvi vinn ek mwa?
Sarah: Non, li bon. Mo ena mo loto laba. Kot to pou zwenn li?
John: To konn bar-la anfas ar laplaz?
Sarah: Wi, mo konn li. OK, mo pou la dan enn demi-er.
John: Great, see you there.
Although at first sight this dialogue might look intimidating, apart from a few new words of vocabulary, it doesn’t contain anything that we haven’t covered in the first three chapters. You already have all the tools you need to hold a similar conversation! 38Chapter Four: Dialogue 1

 Learning Tip
Don’t get too bogged down with trying to understand every word of dialogue. Instead, just try to get a feel for what is being said. This is a skill you will need to call upon as you begin to develop an ability to converse in Creole. Often, although you won’t pick up on every word that is being spoken, you will gain the gist through all sorts of other clues, such as non-verbal gestures or tone of voice.
 To find out how, let’s break this conversation down and see how it was formed by looking at each line of the original conversation along with literal English versions.
The literal translations have been used to demonstrate that, although the sentiment of a sentence can be carried from one language to another, it isn’t possible to simply transpose Creole words for English, or vice versa. It doesn’t feel quite right. There is nothing that stops the translation making sense, but it’s not quite right at the same time.
Often, when a person starts learning a new language, they simply compose a sentence in their head in English and then replace the words of that sentence with the foreign-language equivalents. But, as you will discover, each language has its own personality, and you should try to engage with this personality from the start. 
Sarah: Hi John. How’s it going?
John: Good, thanks. And you?
Sarah: Pretty good. Hey, I have a surprise for you.
John: What’s that?
The most obvious thing about the very start of this conversation is that it’s in English! That’s because, although Creole is a fully fledged language in its own right, it has always existed alongside other languages and it is very common for speakers to switch between languages at whim, sometimes even mid-sentence! So, a bilingual conversation like this is not at all unusual.

Sarah: Mo pe aprann koz Kreol Morisien.
I am learning Mauritian Creole.
Sarah has just surprised her friend John with her first sentence of Creole (just as you will soon be able to do with your Creole-speaking friends). If you recall, the pe marker is used to signify something that is ongoing; that something is the verb aprann, meaning to learn. So pe aprann means learning.

John: Huh? To koz Kreol aster?
Huh? You speak Creole now?
The new word that stands out here is aster, meaning now. This is the first time we have come across this handy little word. 39Chapter Four: Dialogue 1

Sarah: Wi, enn tigit. Mo pe aprann depi twa mwa.
Yes, a little bit. I have been learning for three months.
Tigit is another brand new word, meaning a small quantity or a little bit. It derives from another handy word, piti, often abbreviated to ti, meaning small.

John: Mari bon sa! Kouma to trouv li, fasil ouswa dificil?
That’s really great! How are you finding it, easy or difficult?
The first word of this sentence, mari, is used a lot in Creole. Its literal meaning is very, or superior, but those words don’t really do it justice. Its real job is to ‘big up’ the word it precedes, in this case bon, meaning good. So, whilst a literal translation might be very good, perhaps VERY good would better convey the sentiment of mari bon.
This sentence also uses the short form of the verb trouve, but for its other meaning: to find. It is very common in Creole for words to have multiple meanings.
We also have three other simple additions in this sentence, in fasil owswa dificil, meaning easy or difficult. You will find that the word owswa (meaning or) is often abbreviated to swa.

Sarah: Toulede! Gramer-la plis fasil ki Angle, me mo gagn difikilte pou rapel tou bann mo.  Sak fwa mo aprann enn nouvo mo, mo bliye enn lot.
Both! The grammar is easier than English, but I have difficulty remembering all the words.   Every time I learn a new word, I forget another.
There is all sorts going on in this sentence, with a lot of new vocabulary!
The first of these new words is toulede, meaning both. This is another throwback to the French, this time to tous les deux (literally all the two). So Sarah is explaining that she is finding some elements of learning Creole easy and others more difficult. This is likely a sentiment you will be able to relate to by now!
Apart from the useful word plis, meaning more or more than, the other word of interest in this sentence is ki. We have already experienced ki as an interrogative, used to ask questions such as what, who and whom.  But, as you can see, it is also used as a comparative: to compare one thing to another. This makes it a very useful little word.
The word mo perfectly demonstrates that, as many words have multiple meanings, there is a need to view each sentence as a whole rather than as a collection of individual words. 40Chapter Four: Dialogue 1

unless you believe there exists more than one of you, the context of the sentence tells us this word must mean something else, and in this case it means word. Sarah uses the word nouvo to identify these as new words.
There are three new verbs in this sentence. Rapel, which has the same long and short forms, means to remember. And bliye, which also has only one form, is the verb to forget. But the real gem in this sentence is the verb gagne, in its short form gagn. This is such an important word in Creole that it is covered separately within this chapter.

John: Me to koz li bien!
But you speak it well!
This sentence introduces another everyday word, one you will use every day you speak Creole: bien, meaning good.

Sarah: Pankor! Mo bizin pratike. Mo sir mo pe fer boukou fot kan mo koze!
Not yet. I need to practise. I am sure I am making lots of mistakes when I talk!
A few useful new words are introduced here: pankor, not yet; the verb pratike, meaning to practise; sir, sure; and fot, mistake or fault.

John: Pa trakase. Bizin fer bann fot pou aprann. Avek pratike, biento to pou kapav koz kouma enn Morisien!
Don’t worry. (You) have to make mistakes to learn. With practice, soon you will be able to speak like  a Mauritian!
Here we can see the use of the negative marker, pa, in action. It is used to form the negative of another new verb, trakase, meaning to worry. So, pa trakase becomes don’t worry.
The next sentence is interesting for a couple of reasons. Firstly, the sentence begins bizin fer bann fot, which has a literal meaning of have to make mistakes. Did you notice the lack of an objective pronoun (you)? In Creole, it isn’t absolutely necessary to indicate who or what needs to make mistakes; the context simply suggests it. There is something a little odd going on with the two instances of the word pou, which precede the verbs aprann and kapav. Although the second pou is the future marker we are familiar with, the first is the word pou meaning for or to, a completely different word, which in this case is being used in conjunction with the verb appran, to mean learn.
Last, but not least, there is one more new new word in this sentance, biento, meaning soon.

Sarah: Mo espere! Mo mari kontan ki mo kapav koz ar mo bann kamarad an Kreol.
I hope (so)! I am very happy that I can speak with my friends in Creole. 41Chapter Four: Dialogue 1

Again, the word mari is used to ‘big up’ the word it precedes, in this case kontan, happy. This shows Sarah isn’t just happy she can now talk with her friends in Creole, she is really happy. Note the plural marker bann to indicate more than one friend.
The verb espere, which starts the sentence, means to hope.

John: Hey, ki to pe fer aster? Mo pou pran enn kafe ar Andrew. To anvi vinn zwenn li ek mwa? Li pou gagn enn mari sirpriz ki to kapav koz nou langaz!
Hey, what are you doing now? I am going to meet Andrew. You want to come meet him with me? He’s going to be really surprised that you can speak our language!
The progressive marker, pe, is used for the first time in this conversation, when John asks Sarah what she is doing now. He tells her he is off zwenn, meaning to meet, his friend Andrew and grab a coffee. Except that he doesn’t say grab (although this is a good example of the English equivalent of what he actually says). Instead he uses the verb pran, to take. In Creole, when ordering a drink (or food for that matter), you don’t have a drink, you take it.
The sentence ends with the word langaz, meaning language. 
 Grammar Tip
The verbs zwenn and pran both have a single version; they do not have full (long) and medial (short) forms. They are the same whether at the end of a sentence or in the middle.

Sarah: Mo ti pou al kot mwa, me kitfwa mo kapav vinn enn kou.
I was going to go to my place, but maybe I could come for a while.
Did you spot the combination marker ti pou? Sarah uses this to tell John that she was just going to go home, but its use indicates a change of plan. She then uses the word kitfwa, meaning maybe or perhaps, to tell John that she will come for a while, enn kou.
Sarah tells John that she had been planning to go home. In Creole, home is actually expressed as the ‘place of’ someone. So, my home is kot mwa whereas your home is kot twa (or kot ou depending how well we know each other).

 Language Tip
The small phrase enn kou is used often in Creole to signify that something will happen for a short while. In practice, a sentence fragment like vinn enn kou could also be translated as come here a minute. 42Chapter Four: Dialogue 1

John: Top. To ena to loto anplace? Ouswa to anvi vinn ek mwa?
Great. You have your car here? Or you want to come with me?
Top is a fabulous word. It means best, but in this context great would be a better translation.
In the next sentence, you will notice the use of to twice, in to ena to loto. There is an obvious new word loto, which is a car, but there is actually another new word as well. The second to means your. This is known as a ‘possessive determiner’, and we will look at these in more detail shortly.
An place is a commonly used short phrase. Its literal meaning is in place but in practice it means a sort of informal here. By asking whether Sarah has her car an place, John is asking whether it is hereabouts.
Did you also notice the use of swa, the abbreviated version of ouswa, meaning or?

Sarah: Non, li bon. Mo ena mo loto laba. Kot to pou zwenn li?
No, it’s OK. My car is over there. Where are you going to meet him?
A literal meaning of li bon would be it’s good. This is a good example of the use of li to mean it. However, in this case the it Sarah is referring to isn’t her car. A better approximation of the meaning of li bon in this context would be it’s OK.
Another useful new word is laba, meaning over there, an expansion of the Creole word la meaning there.

John: To konn bar-la anfas ar laplaz?
You know the bar facing the beach?
Although this short conversation is coming to a close, we still have time for new words such as anfas, used when describing a position opposite or facing something or somewhere.

Sarah: Wi, mo konn li. OK, mo pou la dan enn demi-er.
Yes, I know it. OK, I’ll be there in half an hour.
As we saw in chapter three, Creole takes a different approach to the verb to be. So, Sarah only needed to take the word la, meaning there, and precede it with the future marker, pou, to indicate where she will be later.
John: Great, see you there. 43Chapter Four: Dialogue 1

Being possessive
In language, possession is demonstrated using things called ‘possessive determiners’. This is just a fancy grammatical name for words such as my, yours and hers, which indicate possession of something else. So, my book indicates I am in possession of a book. Your car shows you have possession of a car. In Creole these possessive determiners are:

mo – my
to – your (informal)
ou – your (formal)
so – his, hers, its
zot – their, your (singular), your (plural)
As you can see, with the exception of so, the determiners are exactly the same as the personal pronouns. This is because, in Creole, there is no difference between your book and you book. They are both to liv.

mo loto – my car
to loto – your car
so loto – his car
zot loto – their car
This is pretty straightforward so far, but what about expressing possession by a third party – for example, John’s car? For this we need to get a little creative. We express it as John, his car.

John so loto – John’s car
Sarah so liv – Sarah’s book
garson-la so liv – the boy’s book
Everyone’s gain
The verb gagne is very important in Creole. Its literal meaning is to gain; however, it also has the direct meanings of to obtain, to win and to earn. But it also has a number of indirect meanings, replacing verbs such as to be or to have in certain circumstances.

 Pronunciation Tip
Gagne makes use of a nasal sound that, although rare in English words, is very common in French words and those derived from them. An approximation of the correct pronunciation would be gangyay.
For English-speakers, the easiest usage to understand of the verb gagne is its direct translation. 44Chapter Four: Dialogue 1

Mo esper mo pou gagne – I hope I will win
Mo ti gagn Rs 500 – I earned 500 rupees
In these examples, the verb gagne is used in a similar way to gain in English. Where things become a little trickier, however, is when we look at its indirect meanings.
To illustrate this point, let’s have a look at how English and Creole differ in their construction of the sentence I am hungry. Whereas in English we are hungry, using the verb to be, in Creole we gain hunger using the verb gagne.

Mo gagn fin – I am hungry
Li gagn swaf – She is thirsty
To gagn so? – You are hot?
As you can see, in Creole, instead of being something, we gain it. This principle applies equally for hunger, thirst, hot, cold and the like.
As with other verbs, we can also use the various language markers to change the properties of the verb. For example, we can use the progressive marker pe to mark the progressive action of getting hot. Let’s have a look at this in action:

Zot pe gagn so – They are getting hot
Li pou gagn fre – It will get cold
Mo ti gagn swaf – I was thirsty
Gagne is also used when asking to gain something that in English we might ask to have. So, at the supermarket checkout you might ask whether you could gain a bag rather than whether you could have one.

Mo kapav gagn en sak? – Can I have a bag?

 Language Tip
Gagne is usually used when you initiate asking for something, but the verb pran, meaning to take, is used instead when responding to someone who asks what you would like. For example, if a waiter asks for your order, you might say mo pran enn tas dite: I’ll take a cup of tea. 45Chapter four pop quiz

Q. Which is the correct translation of Mo pa ti kapav trouv John so loto?
a: I cannot see John’s car.
b: John couldn’t see my car.
c: I couldn’t see John’s car.
Q. How could the sentence I ate more than my friend be expressed in Creole?
a: Mo ti manz mo kamarad.
b: Mo ti manz plis ki mo kamarad.
c: Mo ti manz plis ki to kamarad.
Q. How could you translate the sentence I haven’t talked to them yet? ________________________________________________
Q. There is a problem with the following sentence. What is it?
Ki ou pou fer yer?
Q. Which word can be added to bring hope to the following sentence? Mo __________ ki li kapav vinn ek mwa demin.
a: esper
b: espere 46Chapter four pop quiz answers

Q. Which is the correct translation of Mo pa ti kapav trouv John so loto? a: I cannot see John’s car.

b: John couldn’t see my car.

c: I couldn’t see John’s car. ✔
The simple past marker, ti, which places this Creole sentence in the past, tells us straight away that answer a cannot be correct. The possessive determiner so, in this case meaning his, means that answer b must also be incorrect. The only answer that matches the question is therefore c.
Q. How could the sentence I ate more than my friend be expressed in Creole? a: 
Mo ti manz mo kamarad.

b: Mo ti manz plis ki mo kamarad. ✔
c: 
Mo ti manz plis ki to kamarad. 
The secret here is identifying the correct possessive determiner and the comparative element, than. We can immediately discount answer a, as it does not include a comparative at all and so translates to I ate my friend!
As answer c uses the determiner to, meaning your, we know that this cannot be correct either, as the sentence is about my friend, not your friend. So this leaves answer b as the correct translation. Q. How could you translate the sentence I haven’t talked to them yet? Mo pankor koz ar zot. In Creole, there are many ways to say just about everything. The key to developing a conversational knowledge of Creole is to simply ensure that the key words of a sentence are included. So, if you included the words talk, yet and them in your sentence, you would almost certainly have been understood. Q. There is a problem with the following sentence. What is it? Ki ou pou fer yer?
 There are two elements of this sentence that don’t marry up: the future marker pou and the word yer, meaning yesterday. Using both these words would give a literal translation of What are you going to do yesterday? For this sentence to make sense, either the past maker, ti, needs to replace the future marker or the word yesterday needs to be replaced with something in the future, such as demin, meaning tomorrow. 47Chapter four pop quiz answers

Q. Which word can be added to bring hope to the following sentence? Mo __________ ki li kapav vinn ek mwa demin. a: 
esper

b: espere  ✔
c: 
pans 
Although both verbs would make sense in this sentence, the clue in the question points towards the verb espere, meaning to hope, rather than panse, meaning to think, to create the sentence I hope that he/she/it can come with me tomorrow.
Deciding which of the long and short forms of the verb espere should be used here can be confusing at first, but if you look closely you will see that the verb is followed by the determinator ki, meaning that, rather than another verb, an object or a person. As a result, the long form espere would be the right choice here. 48Heading here


Chapter Five:  It’s All Getting a  Bit Tense 49Chapter Five: It’s All Getting a Bit Tense

Way back when
Way back in chapter three (feels like ages ago, doesn’t it) we introduced the simple past and future tenses, using the ti and pou markers respectively. Although those tenses are more than enough to get you going, there will be times when you’ll want a greater ability to express yourself in the past or future. This chapter introduces a few more tenses to provide you with that additional range.
Our first new tense is called the ‘present perfect’. It is used to form sentences in the form I have done something.
As you will have come to expect by now, this tense is formed with another past marker, finn. So, whereas mo ti koze means I spoke, mo finn koze means I have spoken. Simple.
What is a little less simple, though, is picking up on this marker in everyday usage, as it is often abbreviated to inn, or even ’nn. So, mo finn koze is the same as mo inn koze, which is the same as mo’nn koze.
Unfortunately this sound is also usually spoken quite quickly, so it has to be listened for. Don’t worry though: now you know what to listen for, you will soon start to pick up on it!
It may be easier to grasp by comparing this new tense with the simple past tense we looked at before. Consider the following two sentences.

Li ti trouv nou – He saw us (simple past tense)
Li’nn trouv nou – He has seen us (present perfect tense)
Although both of these sentences are placed in the past, you can see there is a subtle difference in their use. In reality, though, you are unlikely to be misunderstood if you mistakenly use the wrong past tense.
Just now
Before we move away from the past, there is one more past tense to take a quick look at. It sits right at the point where the present becomes the past and is called the ‘immediate past’.
Formed using the immediate past marker, fek, this tense is used to express something that has just happened, within the past few moments. So, whereas mo ti manze means I ate (in the past) and mo finn manze is I have eaten (in the past), mo fek manze means I just ate (a few moments ago).
Collectively, we now have three separate ways of expressing the past, from the immediate past to way back when, more than enough to maintain a conversation in Creole. 50Chapter Five: It’s All Getting a Bit Tense

Showing willing
In Creole, as in English, there is a second future tense that is used to express events of the future. However, it provides a slightly different context from the ‘simple future’, which we have already looked at.
Its purpose is to describe or confirm plans or intentions for the future for which we would most likely use the word will in English. I call this the ‘willing future’ tense, and it uses the marker ava.

Mo ava koz ar li demin – I will talk with him tomorrow
Understanding when to use the simple future and when to use the willing future is perhaps easier when they are put in context. So, let’s compare these two sentences:

Mo pou al laplaz demin – I am going to the beach tomorrow
Mo ava al laplaz demin – I will go to the beach tomorrow
In the first sentence the speaker uses the simple future tense, indicated by the marker pou, to state it is a matter of fact they are going to the beach tomorrow. It is clear-cut; I am going. In contrast, the second statement indicates that it is the speaker’s intention to go to the beach.
Whilst generally both sentences convey the same message, the use of ava, to indicate the speaker’s intention to do something in the future, carries a very subtle inference that this event is a little less definite. To gain a better insight into this difference, let’s compare two more sentences:

Mo pou arriv sink-er – I am going to arrive at five o’clock
Mo ava arriv sink-er – I will arrive at five o’clock
Again, both sentences are set in the future. However, whereas the first once again conveys a message of certainty, the second indicates the speaker’s plan or intention. Swap will arrive at five o’clock with should arrive at five o’clock and you get a sense of the subtle difference.
The use of ava is definitely less common in Creole than pou. And, unfortunately, when it is used it is often abbreviated to ’va or ’a. So, care needs to be taken to listen out for this ‘willing’ future tense!
More combinations
With these additional language markers at our disposal, we now also have more possible combination markers to extend our range even further. Let’s take a look at a couple of these.
First, how about combining the two past markers ti and finn to create a new ti finn marker to express an action or event that has already happened? I call this the ‘storytelling marker’ as it describes something that happened at an undetermined time in the past. 51Chapter Five: It’s All Getting a Bit Tense

Mo ti koze – I spoke
Mo finn koze – I have spoken
Mo ti finn koze – I had already spoken
Don’t forget, finn will often be abbreviated to inn or ’nn, so don’t be surprised to hear mo ti finn shorted to mo ti’nn. Let’s see this in action.

Mo ti’nn koze kan li ti arive – I had already spoken when he/she/it arrived
We’re not done yet, though. How about turning a combination marker into a ‘super-combination’? (Ok., I made that up, but I think it expresses the flexibility of these markers.)
Let’s look what happens when you take the ti finn (or ti’nn) marker we created above and combine it with the immediate past marker fek.

Mo ti’nn koze – I had already spoken
Mo fek koze – I have just spoken
Mo ti’nn fek koze – I had just spoken
This time we have created a marker to express something that had just happened in the context of our story, rather than something that has just happened in real life.

Mo ti’nn fek koze kan li ti arive – I had just spoken when he arrived
As you can see, the Creole language has an extraordinary ability to simply combine existing words to create additional meaning. This is the true power of the language. With practice you will soon find that these combination markers will flow naturally in your conversation.

 Grammar Tip
Don’t forget, the super-combination marker ti’nn fek is used for describing something in storytelling mode, meaning it describes something that happened at an undetermined time in the past.
For something that happened at a time in the past that can be specified, such as last week, the more simple ti fek would generally be used instead.
A simple rule of thumb is to use ti fek if the speaker is able to more or less recall the date or time of the action. Otherwise ti’nn fek would be appropriate.
Don’t get too bogged down in this, though. Either would be understood in either situation. 52Chapter five pop quiz

Q. What is the correct translation of the sentence Mo ti dir ki li’nn trouv nou?
a: I said he saw us
b: I said that he had seen us
c: I said that he was going to see us
Q. Rearrange the following words to form the sentence I thought he would have sold it.
ti li ki ti li vann pou mo panse
Q. Which word would you add to the sentence Li fek zwenn li to change its meaning from He just met her to He had just met her?
a: ti’nn
b: pou
c: ti
Q. How many verbs are contained in the sentence to’le al ek zot?
a: one
b: two
c: three
Q. How could the sentence They will come tomorrow, if they can be expressed in Creole?
________________________________________________ 53Chapter five pop quiz answers

Q. What is the correct translation of the sentence Mo ti dir ki li’nn trouv nou?
a: I said he saw us

b: I said that he had seen us  ✔
c: I said that he was going to see us

Ok, this is a little tricky unless you remember the difference between the simple past and the present perfect tenses. Although both place an event or action in the past, which one you use makes the difference between saying I saw and I had seen.
Only answer b makes use of both tenses, with ti being used to place the verb dir in the simple past tense, said, and finn (disguised in its abbreviated form, ’nn) to place the verb trouv in the present perfect tense, had seen.
Q. Rearrange the following words to form the sentence I thought he would have sold it.
Mo ti panse ki li ti pou vann li ✔
The key to this question is placing the verbs and the personal pronoun in their correct order. Once you have done that, the rest just falls into place.
Q. Which word would you add to the sentence Li fek zwenn li to change its meaning from He just met her to He had just met her?
a: ti’nn ✔
b: 
pou

c: ti ✔
The correct answer could best be summarised as ‘it depends’. We know that the action happened in the past, which means answer b (which uses the simple future marker) cannot be correct. But which of the other two markers should be used depends on whether the speaker is able to determine when the event they are describing occurred.
If the speaker can recall the approximate date of the event, the combination marker ti fek would most likely be used. Otherwise, the storytelling marker ti finn fek (abbreviated to ti’nn fek) would be used. In practice, though, both would be acceptable.
Q. How many verbs are contained in the sentence to’le al ek zot?
a: one

b: two ✔
c: three 54Chapter five pop quiz answers

There are two verbs in this sentence, which translates as You want to go with them? The first is oule (meaning to want), in its abbreviated form ’le, and the second is the short form al of the verb ale, meaning to go.
Q. How could the sentence They will come tomorrow, if they can be expressed in Creole?
Zot ava vini demin, si zot kapav
This is a fairly straightforward translation. However, as the sentence expresses the people’s intention to come, if they can, the ‘willing future’ marker ava is used instead of the more usual simple future marker, pou. 55Heading here


Chapter Six:  Quirky Creole 56Chapter Six: Quirky Creole

Double talk
Over the years, Creole has developed all sorts of wonderful characteristics that give it a great deal of personality. These are all the little things that make it stand out as a language in its own right. In this chapter we are going to take a look at some of these characteristics, in which Creole takes a different approach from English. A great example of this is the habit of ‘double talk’: repeating a word to bring emphasis to that word.
Compared to languages such as English, Creole possesses a relatively limited vocabulary. But what Creole lacks in volume it makes up for in creativity. Missing a word to bring an enhanced meaning to what you are saying? No problem, just say it twice!
Creole-speakers double-talk all sorts of words to bring additional meaning to those words. In the case of verbs, double talk generally makes the verb less meaningful, more informal. So, whereas the verb koze means to talk, koz-koze has the more informal meaning to chat.

Mo ti koz ar li yer – I talked with him yesterday
Mo ti koz-koze ar li yer – I chatted with him yesterday
Mo pou mars taler – I am going to walk later
Mo pou mars-marse taler – I am going for a stroll later
Whilst double talk usually gives a verb less purpose, sometimes it can change the meaning completely, such as in the case of bat-bate, which in double talk means to do little jobs here and there but originates from the verb bate meaning to beat. Unfortunately there is no particular reason for this; examples like this are just thrown in there to confuse us students of Creole!
Other more general words will often be double-talked as well, to emphasise a point. So, whereas vit means fast, vit-vit sort of means double fast, or really fast. Of course, we could just use mari vit, meaning very fast, but somehow that doesn’t feel as expressive as vit-vit.

Mo bizin fer li vit – I must do it fast
Mo bizin fer li vit-vit – I must do it fast, fast (really fast)
Of course, as Creole is a language of expressiveness, where one or even two is not enough, you can just keep going.

Sime-la li long – The road is long
Sime-la li bien long – The road is very long
Sime-la li bien-bien long – The road is very, very long
Sime-la li bien-bien-bien long – The road is very, very, very long (extremely long)
Within reason, double talk is usually only limited to how long you can speak without needing to take a breath. A word can be repeated as much as it takes to get the point across! 57Chapter Six: Quirky Creole

Time for more
Creole deals with dates and times slightly differently from English. For starters, rather than asking for the time, in Creole we ask for the hour, ler:

Ki ler la? – What is the hour (time)?
In Creole, time is described as the hour and then the number of minutes plus or minus the hour. So, 10.00am is described as ten hour and 10.20am is ten hour twenty. However, 10.40am uses the word mwin, meaning minus, to create eleven hour minus twenty. Let’s have a look at these times in Creole.

dis-er – ten hour (10.00am)
dis-er-vin – ten hour twenty (10.20am)
onz-er-mwin-vin – eleven hour minus twenty (10.40am)
You will notice that ler, hour, is shortened to er when used in this context.

 Pronunciation Tip
There is a habit, when pronouncing words ending with the letter s, to use a z sound instead when that word is directly linked with another. So dis-er would more often be pronounced di-z-er rather than di-s-er.
There are a couple of options when quarter and half hours are involved. The time 10.30am may be described either as ten hour thirty or as ten hour and a half. The same applies to quarters, so 10.45am could be eleven hour minus fifteen or eleven hour minus a quarter.

dis-er-e-kar – ten hour and a quarter (10.15am)
dis-er-edmi – ten hour and a half (10.30am)
onz-er-mwin-kar – eleven hour minus a quarter (10.45am)
In time, am and pm are expressed using dimatin for the morning and dan lapremidi for the afternoon. Midday and midnight are midi and minwi respectively.

trwa-z-er-dis lapremidi – three hour ten in the afternoon (3.10pm)
nef-er dimatin – nine hour in the morning (9am) 58Chapter Six: Quirky Creole

 Grammar Tip
In Creole, half is demi. However, an abbreviated form, edmi, is used in reference to the time. This is a throw-back to its French origin: et demi, meaning and half.
Dates are described in much the same way as English, with numbers to represent the days of the month and the year.

Lindi – Monday
Mardi – Tuesday
Merkredi – Wednesday
Zedi – Thursday
Vandredi – Friday
Samdi – Saturday
Dimans – Sunday
wikenn – weekend
 
Zanvie- January
Fevriye – February
Mars – March
Avril – April
Me – May
Zwin – June
Zilie – July
Out – August
Septam – September
Oktob – October
Novam – November
Desam – December
So, Monday 28th November 2005 would be expressed as Lindi Vintwit Novam De Mil Sink.
First, second, third and so on (correctly known as ‘ordinal numbers’) are formed simply by adding -iem to the end of a number:

premie – first
deziem – second
trwaziem – third
katiem – fourth
sinkiem – fifth
sisiem – sixth
setiem – seventh 59Chapter Six: Quirky Creole

witiem – eighth
nefiem – ninth
disiem – tenth
You will notice that premie (first) is an exception to this rule. Having dealt with first, this is probably a good time to mention the word for last, which is dernie.

 Grammar Tip
The Creole words for second and third have an additional z. This is an often-used tool in Creole to make certain words easier to say. Without this z, the word second would be pronounced phonetically as day-ee-em, which doesn’t roll off the tongue as easily as the version with the z in place.
 Age
The concept of age is also expressed differently in English and Creole. Whereas in English we are our age (I am eight years old), Creole follows its French roots, in which we have our age (I have eight years). When we ask someone for their age we use the word larz.

Ki larz to ena? – How old are you?
 If you recall all the way back to chapter two, the Creole word ena is used in the context of having something, so we can use it here to describe having our age.

Mo ena wit-an – I have eight years
Since how long?
Depi is another of those handy little words that you will find yourself using all the time, as you develop your conversational Creole. It can mean since, for or from, depending on the context.
In English, we use a fancy tense called the ‘present perfect continuous’ to express something that we have been doing for some time and are still doing now.
I have been doing something for two years
I have been doing something since I was twelve years old
However, Creole places those sentences in the ‘progressive present’ tense, using the progressive marker pe combined with depi to form the sentence. Literal translations might look like: 60Chapter Six: Quirky Creole

Mo pe fer kiksoz depi de lane – I am doing something for two years
Mo pe fer kiksoz depi mo ena douz lane – I am doing something since I was twelve years old
Going places
One thing the Creole language is not short of is the ability to describe how to get from A to B, or to describe where something is in reference to something else. There is a comprehensive vocabulary to choose from. We have already met some of these words, such as isi, meaning here. But let’s take a look at some more of the most commonly used words for describing where something is.

devan – in front (of)
avan – before
deryer – behind
laba – over there
drwat – right
gos – left
adrwat – (to the) right
agos – (to the) left
lao – above
enba – below
anfas … ar/ek – opposite … with
ant … ar/ek – between … with
akote – next to
deor – outside
andan – inside (when referring to a person)
ledan – inside (when referring to an object)
Although learning a list of vocabulary like this is difficult in itself, we are fortunate that, in general, describing where something is uses a very similar structure to English.

Get sa lisien, deryer loto-la – Look at that dog, behind the car
Tifi-la ti mars devan sa garson-la – The girl walked in front of the boy
Ena kiksoz lor latab-la – There is something on the table
These particular sentences are constructed in a very similar way to how they would be in English. However, in Creole, some things relating to describing where something is are dealt with quite differently.
For example, whilst Creole has equivalents for the words left and right, it also has separate words meaning to turn left and to turn right (agos and adrwat, respectively). So, whereas lor to gos means on your left, tourn adrwat uses a separate word to give the meaning turn left. 61Chapter Six: Quirky Creole

The differences don’t stop there. Consider this sentence:

Lisien-la ant tifi-la ek so kamarad – The dog is between the girl and her friend
As you can see, this sentence uses the word ant, meaning between, to describe the position of the dog. But, whereas in English a person or object is described as being between one thing and another, Crole uses the words ar or ek, both meaning with.
This same principle applies to the word anfas, meaning opposite. Again, this type of sentence is constructed with ar or ek.

Zwenn mwa laba, anfas ar laplaz-la – Meet me over there, opposite the beach
Where are you from?
One last way that Creole differs slightly from English can be found in the word used to describe where someone comes from. In Creole, the verb sorti, meaning to leave, is used to describe someone’s place of origin.

Mo Angle, mo sort Langleter – I am English, I come from England

Li Morisien, li sort Moris – He is Mauritian, he comes from Mauritius 62Chapter six pop quiz

Q. What time does midi mwin vennsink refer to?
a: 2.25am
b: 12.25pm
c: 11.35am
Q. What does the sentence Ti ena enn ti garson mean?
a: This is a small boy
b: There was a small boy
c: There was a boy
Q. How would the sentence above need to be amended to include the boy’s age as being eight  years old?
____________________________________________
Q. How could the sentence I am going to go outside be translated into Creole?
____________________________________________
Q. Can you translate, and then answer, the following question? Clue: trwa-?-iem.
Ena enn fot dan mo-la ‘trwaiem’. Ki sa fot-la? 63Chapter six pop quiz answers

Q. What time does midi mwin vennsink refer to?
a: 2.25am

b: 12.25pm

c: 11.35am ✔
The literal translation of the time in the question is midday minus twenty-five, making 11.35am the correct answer.
Q. What does the sentence Ti ena enn ti garson mean?
a: This is a small boy

b: There was a small boy ✔
c: There was a boy

The marker ti tells us that this sentence is placed in the past, which immediately shows that answer a cannot be correct. But there is a second word ti, this time meaning small, in the sentence. Answer b is the only sentence that matches these two criteria, making it the correct answer.
Q. How would the sentence above need to be amended to include the boy’s age as being eight years old?
… ki ti ena wit-an
As we learned in this chapter, in Creole we have our age rather than being our age. So we need to use the word ena to describe having wit-an, eight years. But, we must also remember to use the past marker ti to place this in the past, to match the tense used in the rest of the sentence.
So the full sentence would read, Ti ena enn ti garson ki ti ena wit-an: There was a small boy who was eight years old.
Q. How could the sentence I am going to go outside be translated into Creole?
Mo pou al deor
This sentence could almost as clearly have been stated as mo al deor, but that would translate as I go outside. To express that the speaker is going to go, the future marker pou needs to be placed before the verb ale.
Q. Can you translate, and then answer, the following question? Clue: trwa-?-iem.
Ena enn fot dan mo-la ‘trwaiem’. Ki sa fot-la? 64Chapter six pop quiz answers

Although this may seem tricky at first, it is actually just a case of performing a simple translation. The Creole sentence can be translated to read, There is a mistake with the word twraiem. What is that mistake?
The only tricky word here is fot, meaning fault or mistake, as we learned in chapter four.
Once we have translated the question, we can see that the clue suggests that the word twraziem is misspelled, as it is missing the z to become trwaziem. 65Heading here


Chapter Seven:  Dialogue 2 66Chapter Seven: Dialogue 2

John, Sarah and Andrew
Now we have even more structure and vocabulary of the Creole language to draw upon, let’s have a look at another everyday conversation by catching up with John, Andrew and Sarah at Cafe One. Again, don’t worry about words you don’t understand – we’ll break it all down shortly.

John: Bonzour Andrew. Ki manier?
Andrew: Mwa, mo korek. Twa?
John: Korek. Fer lontan to isi?
Andrew: Non, mo fek arive, depi sink minit.
John: Good. Mo ti pans mo an-retar.
Andrew: Non, tou korek, asiz twa. Ki to pou bwar?
John: Mwa, mo pou pran enn kafe, silteple.
Andrew: OK, atann enn kou. Mo pou komann bann kafe-la.
John: Pran enn pou Sarah ousi. Li pou vinn zwenn nou biento.
Andrew: Abon! Mo pa rapel dernie fwa ki mo ti trouv li.
John: Wi, mo kone. Mo ti zwenn li fek-la. Mo ti dir li bizin vini pou pran kafe ar nou.
Andrew: Mari top. OK, mo pou pran trwa alor. [leaving]
Sarah: Alo John.
John: Hey Sarah. Glad you could make it. Mo finn komann enn kafe pou twa. Korek sa?
Sarah: Wi, mari bon sa. Kot Andrew ete?
John: Li’nn al pran bann kafe-la. Get li laba, li pe vini aster-la.
Andrew: Hi Sarah. How are you?
Sarah: I’m good thank you, me si to anvi nou kapav koz Kreol. Mo kapav konpran si to koz  dousman.
Andrew: Eh? John, to pa ti dir mwa ki li kapav koz Kreol! Kan to ti aprann sa?
Sarah: Mo pe aprann depi twra mwa.
John: Ki to pans, Andrew? Li koz bien, non? Apre zis enn-de mwa!
Andrew: Serye sa! Li koz mari bien.
Sarah: Mersi! Mo pe seye!
Although this is still a relatively short dialogue, it includes a lot of new vocabulary and recaps many of the concepts we have looked at over the past few chapters. As before, let’s break the dialogue down and see how the language has been structured.

John: Bonzour Andrew. Ki manier?
Hello Andrew. How’s it going?
The Creole language includes a number of greetings, but ki manier is one of the most common. Its literal meaning is how’s the behaviour, but in context it just means how’s it going?

Andrew: Mwa, mo korek. Twa?
I’m good. And you? 67Chapter Seven: Dialogue 2

Korek is another of those catch-all words you will use every single day in Creole. It means good. And it means OK. And it means healthy. And it means fine. And it means …
In practice, korek can be used as a positive affirmation of just about anything, and people will often use it as a standalone greeting. In this context, though, Andrew uses it as a reply to mean I’m OK or I’m good.

John: Korek. Fer lontan to isi?
I’m good. Have you been here long?
There’s that word korek again, used as a response to a greeting.
John also asks Andrew whether he has been waiting long, but let’s have a closer look at this sentence. The literal meaning of fer lontan to isi is do long time you here. It uses a new word, lontan, meaning long time, and once again it demonstrates how English and Creole can differ in the way they each construct their sentences.

Andrew: Non, mo fek arive, depi sink minit.
No, I just arrived, five minutes ago.
The immediate past marker, fek, is used to indicate an action that has just occurred, in this case Andrew arriving at Cafe One. You might also have noticed the use of depi. This gives a literal translation of since five minutes, but in context it means five minutes ago.

John: Good. Mo ti pans mo an-retar.
That’s good. I thought I (was) late.
This is another example of the lack of the verb to be in Creole. You will notice that John thought he was an-retar, meaning late, but there is no word for was (which is why it is shown in brackets in the translation).

Andrew: Non, tou korek, asiz twa. Ki to pou bwar?
No, everything’s good, sit down. What are you going to drink?
Korek, again! Can you see how useful this word is? This time it is used with tou to signify that all, or everything, is good.
Andrew uses the short form of the verb asize, meaning to sit, to invite his friend to sit. But you may have noticed the use of twa, the objective form of you. This forms a phrase with the literal meaning sit you, which is roughly equivalent to the English sit down or take a seat. 68Chapter Seven: Dialogue 2

Just like the word drink in English, the word bwar is used both as a noun (to mean a drink, as in a beverage) and as a verb (to drink). So it’s entirely possible to bwar enn bwar, or drink a drink. In this case, though, Andrew uses the future marker, pou, to ask John what he will drink.

John: Mwa, mo pou pran enn kafe, silteple.
Me, I’ll take a coffee, please.
We are already familiar with the concept of taking a drink, from the previous dialogue, but this sentence also introduces the word for please, silteple. This is the informal version of the word please, used because John and Andrew know each other. It they were talking in a more formal manner, they would use the formal version, silvouple.

Andrew: OK, atann enn kou. Mo pou komann bann kafe-la.
OK, wait a moment. I’ll go and order the coffees.
In Creole, atann, the verb to wait, has only one form, so it is the same regardless of where it appears in a sentence. Andrew uses this verb with enn kou – which we learned earlier means a little or, in this context, a moment – to tell John to hang on whilst he orders the drinks. The short form komann, from another new verb, komande, meaning to place an order, is used to achieve this.

John: Pran enn pou Sarah ousi. Li pou vinn zwenn nou biento.
Take one for Sarah as well. She is coming to meet us soon.
Although the word ousi means also, it can also be used for all sorts of similar meanings. In this case it is used to signify as well.
John uses the word biento, meaning soon, to give Andrew an idea of when Sarah will arrive.

Andrew: Abon! Mo pa rapel dernie fwa ki mo ti trouv li.
Oh really! I don’t remember the last time I saw her.
Abon is one of those words that doesn’t really have an English equivalent. It is a kind of exclamation, and can be used any time you might say something like really?

John: Wi, mo kone. Mo ti zwenn li fek-la. Mo ti dir li bizin vini pou pran kafe ar nou.
Yes, I know. I met her just now. I told her she had to come for coffee with us.
Fek-la is a fabulous little construction. Its literal meaning is the just, but it is used to mean just now.

Andrew: Mari top. OK, mo pou pran trwa alor. [leaving]
That’s great. OK, I will take three then. 69Chapter Seven: Dialogue 2

As you can see from the translation, Andrew tells John that he is going to take three coffees, whereas we would be more familiar, in English, with him going to get three coffees.
Hopefully, by now, you will be starting to get a feel for this difference between the two languages in terms of taking something rather than getting or having it.

Sarah: Alo John.
Hello John.
Alo, derived from hello, is used in a similar way to its English counterpart. Greetings such as bonzour are used more often, however.

John: Hey Sarah. Glad you could make it. Mo finn komann enn kafe pou twa. Korek sa?
Hey Sarah. Glad you could make it. I have ordered you a coffee. Is that OK?
As before, John demonstrates how Creole sits happily alongside other languages. He then tells Sarah that he has ordered her a coffee, using the past marker, finn, to make the verb komande a past action.

Sarah: Wi, mari bon sa. Kot Andrew ete?
Yes, that’s great. Where’s Andrew?
Have a look at the placement of the word sa, meaning that. As you can see, it appears after the thing describing it. A direct translation of this sentence would read great that. This is quite normal in Creole.
Sometimes a word like sa will appear at the start of a sentence; other times it will appear at the very end. Something you are going to notice over time is that you will just start to know where to place words like these, without really knowing how you know. This is all part of the process of allowing Creole to become natural to you.

John: Li’nn al pran bann kafe-la. Get li laba, li pe vini aster-la.
He has gone for the drinks. Look he’s over there, he’s coming now.
We first came across the verb gete, meaning to look (at), right back in chapter one. John uses the short form get to tell Sarah where Andrew is.

Andrew: Hi Sarah. How are you?
Sarah: I’m good thank you, me si to anvi nou kapav koz Kreol. Mo kapav konpran si to koz dousman.
I’m good thank you, but if you want we can talk Creole. I can understand if you talk slowly. 70Chapter Seven: Dialogue 2

in conjunction with the verb koze, to speak. In Mauritius, people will often speak very fast and will sometimes only partially pronounce words. So, whilst you are learning, it will be very handy for you to be able to ask people to koz dousman, speak slowly.

Andrew: Eh? John, to pa ti dir mwa ki li kapav koz Kreol! Kan to ti aprann sa?
Eh? John, you didn’t tell me that she could speak Creole! When did you learn that?

Sarah: Mo pe aprann depi twra mwa.
I have been learning for three months.

John: Ki to pans, Andrew? Li koz bien, non? Apre zis enn-de mwa!
What do you think, Andrew? She speaks well, doesn’t she? After just a few months!
Two handy little words are introduced here: zis, meaning just, and enn-de, meaning a few. All of these little words are really going to help you to develop a conversational ability in Creole.

Andrew: Serye sa! Li koz mari bien.
That’s serious! She speaks great.
Serye is another one of those odd words with multiple applications in Creole but with a literal meaning that doesn’t really work in English. The direct translation is seriously, but an equivalent in English might be better found in words like great, cool, really good or even interesting.

Sarah: Mersi! Mo pe seye!
Thanks! I am trying!
This dialogue ends with a couple more useful words for our growing list of vocabulary: the verb seye, meaning to try, and mersi, meaning thank you. 71Chapter seven pop quiz

Congratulations – you have made it to your final pop quiz!
The great news is that by now you will be in possession of enough vocabulary and know enough about the structure of Creole to really begin enjoying conversing in the language. But, before you are let loose, there is one last challenge to face. Can you provide translations between Creole and English, as required, for the following sentences?
1. Where are you going?
2. I see the dogs.
3. Where were you yesterday?
4. I will come with you tomorrow, if you like.
5. I have been here since 11.30am.
6. Ti ena enn garson ki ti pe aprann koz Kreol.
7. Li pou gagn fre demin.
8. Zot ti pe atann devan loto so kamarad.
9. Mo esper mo pou kapav fini li avan sa wikenn-la.
10. Mo ti pans zot pou vinn isi taler. 72Chapter seven pop quiz answers

1. Where are you going?  Kot to pe ale? ✔ 2. I see the dogs.  Mo trouv bann lisien. ✔ 3. Where were you yesterday?  Kot to ti ete yer? ✔ 4. I will come with you tomorrow, if you like.  Mo ava vinn ar twa demin, si to anvi. ✔ 5. I have been here since 11.30am.  Mo ti isi depi onz-er-edmi gramatin. ✔ 6. Ti ena enn garson ki ti pe aprann koz Kreol.  There was a boy who was learning to speak Creole. ✔ 7. Li pou gagn fre demin.  He/she/it is going to be cold tomorrow. ✔ 8. Zot ti pe atann devan loto so kamarad.  They were waiting in front of their friend’s car. ✔ 9. Mo esper mo pou kapav fini li avan sa wikenn-la.  I hope I will be able to finish it before this weekend. ✔ 10. Mo ti pans zot pou vinn isi taler.  I thought they were going to come here later. ✔ 73Heading here


A Story (in Creole) 74A Story (in Creole)

The Dog Who Could Sing
Although you may not believe it now, provided you have successfully absorbed the information in all the previous chapters (which may take a couple of re-reads), you will have gained enough knowledge of the Creole language to have a basic conversation about pretty much any subject you want.
Certainly you will need to add to your library of vocabulary (which is where the word list found in part two of this book will come into its own) but you might surprise yourself with how much you can already understand.
To illustrate this point, let’s have a look at a silly story, called ‘The Dog Who Could Sing’, which I originally wrote to read with my own children while we learned Creole together.
Try to read through the story yourself, and see how much you can understand. Don’t worry about understanding every word – that will come later. Instead just concentrate on understanding the gist of the story as a whole.

Sa lisien ki ti kapav sante
Kan mo ti tipti, mo ti pe res pre kot enn ti garson ki ti ena enn lisien ki ti kapav sante! Lisien-la ti apel Jack, e biensir li pa ti kapav sante vreman. Me li ti kapav fer enn tapaz wadire li pe sante, e pou nou bann zanfan, sa ti plis ki sifizan. Nou ti panse ki sa li inkrwayab!
Enn zour, kan nou ti pe zwe avek Jack, nou finn mazine ki kikfwa nou kapav fer enn spektak! Alor, nou ti fabrik enn lestrad avek bwat karton, e nou ti vann bann tiket avek tou nou kamarad ek lafami.
Me, ler zour spektak-la finn arive, lisien Jack ti deside ki li pa anvi sante. Malgre tou seki nou ti seye, li pa ti fer enn son. Nou ti fini vann tou tiket, dimounn ti pe atann ki spektak-la koumanse,  e nou ti perdi nou star!
‘Ki nou pou fer?’ mo kamarad finn dir. Li ti pe trakase ki nou bizin kennsel spektak-la.
‘Atann enn ti moman,’ mo’nn dir vit-vit, ‘mo pe mazine.’
Malgre tou mo bann zefor, mo pa ti pe reisi mazinn nanye. Mo ti pre pou dakor ek mo kamarad, ki nou bizin kennsel, kan mo’nn gagn enn lide. Petet kikenn kapav pretann limem Jack.
‘Enn top lide,’ li’nn dir mwa, ‘me akoz to’nn gagn lide-la, sa kikenn-la bizin tomem sa!’
Alor, de-trwa minit apre, mo’nn debark katpat lor lestrad-la e mo finn pretann ki mo enn lisien ki kapav sante. Telman tou dimounn ti pe extra/mari riye, mo’nn panse ki zame zot pou arete. 75A Story (in Creole)

Spektak-la ti enn gran sikse. Toulezour depi sa zour-la, dimounn kriye mwa Jack, sa lot lisien ki kapav sante! So, how did you get on? There was a lot to take in, but we have covered everything contained in this story over the previous chapters. To fully understand the text, though, let’s break the story down, with a translation in English.

Sa lisien ki ti kapav sante.
The dog who could sing.

Kan mo ti tipti, mo ti pe res pre kot enn ti garson ki ti ena enn lisien ki ti kapav sante! When I was small, I lived near a boy who had a dog that could sing!

Lisien-la ti apel Jack, e biensir li pa ti kapav sante vreman. Me li ti kapav fer enn tapaz wadire li pe sante, e pou nou bann zanfan, sa ti plis ki sifizan. Nou ti panse ki sa li inkrwayab!
The dog was called Jack, and of course he couldn’t really sing. But he could make a noise a bit like singing, and for us children that was more than enough. We thought it was incredible!

Enn zour, kan nou ti pe zwe avek Jack, nou finn mazine ki kikfwa nou kapav fer enn spektak! Alor, nou ti fabrik enn lestrad avek bwat karton, e nou ti vann bann tiket avek tou nou kamarad ek lafami. One day, while we were playing with Jack, we decided to put on a show. So, we made a stage out of cardboard boxes and sold tickets to all our friends and family.

Me, ler zour spektak-la finn arive, lisien Jack ti deside ki li pa anvi sante. Malgre tou seki nou ti seye, li pa ti fer enn son. Nou ti fini vann tou tiket, dimounn ti pe atann ki spektak-la koumanse, e nou ti perdi nou star!
But, on the day of the show, Jack the dog decided he didn’t want to sing. No matter what we tried, he wouldn’t make a sound. We had sold all the tickets, everyone was waiting for the show to start, and we lost our star!

‘Ki nou pou fer?’ mo kamarad finn dir. Li ti pe trakase ki nou bizin kennsel spektak-la.
‘What are we going to do?’ said my friend. He was worrying that we would have to cancel the show.

‘Atann enn ti moman,’ mo’nn dir vit-vit, ‘mo pe mazine.’
‘Wait a moment,’ I said impatiently, ‘I’m thinking.’ 76A Story (in Creole)

Malgre tou mo bann zefor, mo pa ti pe reisi mazinn nanye. Mo ti pre pou dakor ek mo kamarad, ki nou bizin kennsel, kan mo’nn gagn enn lide. Petet kikenn kapav pretann limem Jack.
No matter how hard I tried, I couldn’t think of anything. I was about to agree with my friend, that we needed to cancel, when I had an idea. Perhaps someone could just pretend to be Jack.

‘Enn top lide,’ li’nn dir mwa, ‘me akoz to’nn gagn lide-la, sa kikenn-la bizin tomem sa!’
‘A great idea,’ said my friend, ‘but since it was your idea, that someone should be you!’

Alor, de-trwa minit apre, mo’nn debark katpat lor lestrad-la e mo finn pretann ki mo enn lisien ki kapav sante. Telman tou dimounn ti pe extra/mari riye, mo’nn panse ki zame zot  pou arete.
And so, a few minutes later, I walked onto the stage on my hands and feet and pretended to be a dog that could sing. Everyone laughed so much, I thought they would never stop.

Spektak-la ti enn gran sikse. Toulezour depi sa zour-la, dimounn kriye mwa Jack, sa lot lisien ki kapav sante!
The show was a great success. Every day since that day people have been calling me Jack, that other dog who could sing.
So, now you have read both the Creole and English versions of the story, go back and read through the story again.
Remember, there will often not be an exact way to translate every sentence between English and Creole, so try and look at how each sentence was written, and spot where the constructions differ in each language. 77Heading here


And Finally 78And Finally

We have reached the end of this book, but this is just the start of your journey with this colourful language.
Learning a new language can be confusing at the best of times. The main reason is that, although you may have started to speak a little Creole, you are probably still thinking in English. This means having to mentally translate everything back and forth between the two languages every time you want to communicate.
To really develop your conversational ability, try not to think of Creole as English with different words. Instead try to get into the habit as soon as possible of keeping each language in its native form. Remember, once you have a grasp of the simple structure of Creole, the rest is just about adding new words to your vocabulary.
Learning just a few new words a day will help you to build an extensive list before you know it. After all, the only way to learn Creole is to speak Creole. And so, I want to leave you with one of the most important sentences you will ever learn in Creole.
Kouma mo dir ______ an Kreol? – How do I say _____ in Creole?
The gap is for you to fill. This book has given you enough knowledge to get out there and start talking, but there is still so much to learn. The real fun is only just about to start. Take this sentence, and this book, and get out there to fill the gaps yourself. 79Heading here


Part Two:  English–Kreol  Vocabulary List 80Verbs

able (to be)kapav
acceptaksepte, aksept
accompanyakonpagne, akonpagn
adjustaziste, azist
admireadmire, admir
advise (offer council)konseye, konsey
afraid (to be)gagn per
allowpermet
annoyagase, agas
answerreponn
appearaparet or paret
applyaplike, aplik
approachkoste
assureasire, asir
bathelave, lav
be (relating to location)ete
beatbate, bat
becomedevini or vini
beginkoumanse, koumans
bitemorde, mord
blameblame, blam
blowsoufle
boastflate, flat
boilbwi
booststimile, stimil
bored (to be)agase, agas
borrowanprinte, anprint
botheramerde, amerd
bowinkline, inklin
breatherepire, respir
bringamene, amen
brokenkase, kas
brushbrose, bros
buildaranze, aranz or ranze, ranz
burnbrile, bril
bursteklate, eklat
buryantere, anter
can (to be able)kapav
cancelkensel
 caresskarese, karess
carrysarye
carvegrave, grav
catchatrape, atrap or maye, may
chainansene, ansenn
changesanze, sanz
chasepouse, pous
cheatfrode, frod or trike, trik
chewmasse, mass or moule, moul
chooseswazir
circleanserkle
claimreklame, reklam
classifyklasifie
cleannetwaye, netway
clearefase, efas
climbgrinpe, grinp
closeferme, ferm
collapsetonbe, tom
collectkolekte
collidetape, tap
comevini
complainplengne, plengn
completekonplete, konplet
compresskonpresse, konpress
concernkonserne, konsern
confuseabriti
congratulatefelisite, felisit
consentaksepte, aksept
consultkonsilte
controlkontrole, kontrol
cookkwi
copykopie
correctkorize, koriz
coughtouse, tous
countkonte, kont
coverkouver
crawlranpe, ranp
createkree
crouchasize lor lipie
crumplefrwase, frwas
crushfrwase, frwas or kraze, kraz

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 81
cryplore, plor
cutkoupe, koup
damageandomaze, andomaz
dancedanse, dans
dareoze, oz
deal (with)gagn zafer avek
deceiveanbete, anbet
decidedeside, desid
declaredeklare, deklar
decoratedekore, dekor
decreasediminie
defenddefann
dehydratedezidrate, dezidrat
deleteefase, efas
deliverlivre
demonstratedemontre or montre
dependdepann
descenddesann
desiredesire, desir
despisemeprize, mepriz
destroytouye, touy
developdevlope, devlop
diemor
differki diferan ar
digfouye, fouy
digestdizere, dizer
directdonn direksion
disagreepa dakor
disappeardisparet
discussdiskite, diskit
dislikepa kontan
dispersedisperse, dispers or fane, fann
disputediskite, diskit
distributedistribie
diveplonze, plonz
dividedivize, diviz
dofer
dragtire, tir
drawdesine, desinn
dreamreve, rev
dress (oneself)abiye, abiy
dribblereye, rey
 drinkbwar
dripkoule, koul
drivekondire, kondir
droolbave, bav
droplarge, larg
drop (allow to fall)lestonbe
dryfer sek or met sek
eatmanze, manz
educateedike, edik
ejectezekte
embarrassanbarase, anbaras
embraceanbrase, anbras
encourageankouraze, ankouraz
enterrantre, rant
escapesove, sov
exaggerateexazere, exazer
exchangeesanze, esanz
existexiste, exist
expectatann
experiencefer lexperyans
explodeeklate, eklat or exploze, exploz
expressexprime, exprim
fall (down)tonbe, tom
fishlapes
forgetbliye
fun (to have)fer gamat
getgagne, gagn
givedonne, donn
goale, al
grasptrape, trap
greetsalie
grindkraze, kraz
gripsezi
guard (to look after)veye, vey
hidekasiet
hopeespere, esper
irritateagase, agas
joinzwenn
jumpsote, sot
justifyzistifie
keepgarde, gard
kissanbrase, anbras or ba

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 82
kneel (down)azenou
knocktape, tap
knowkone, konn
leakkoule, koul
lift (up)leve, lev
magnifygrosi
maintainmintenir
makefabrike, fabric or fer
managedirize, diriz
markmarke, mark
mark (check accuracy)korize, koriz
marrymarye
mean (to signify)sinifie, sinifi
measuremezire, mezir
meetzwenn
memorisememorize, memoriz
mentionmansione, mansionn
mergezwenn
migrateemigre
mindanbarase, anbaras
minglemelanze avek
minimiseminimize, minimiz
miss (to lack)manke, mank
miss (to omit)rate, rat
misunderstandmal konpran or tronpe, tronp
mixmelanze, melanz
mix upbriye
moanplengne, plengn
motivatemotive, motiv
mouldmoule, moul
mountmonte lor
movebouze, bouz
move (displace)deplase, deplas
move (move forward)avanse, avans
muddleanbrouye
multiplymiltipliye, miltipliy
murmurmirmire, mirmir
musterrasanble, rasanbl
muttergrogne, grogn
nameapele, apel
 navigatenavige
needbizin
neglectneglize, negliz
nippinse, pins
notenote, not
noticeremarke, remark
notifynotifie
obeyobeir
obligeoblize, obliz
observeobzerve, observ
obstructbloke, blok
obtaingagne, gagn
occupyokipe, okip
occurarive, ariv
offendofanse, ofans
offerdone, donn
operateopere, oper
opposeopoze, opoz
organiseorganize, organiz
overdoexazere, exazer
overtakedepasse, depass
ownposede, posed
pacifykalme
packanbale, anbal or ranpli
paintpintire, pintir
pantrespire avek difikilte
paralyseparalize, paraliz
pardonpardone, pardonn
pardon (to excuse)exkize, exkiz
partsepare, separ
participatepartisipe, partisip
passpase, pass
pattape, tap
paypeye, pey
peeklouke, louk
peelplise, plis
peeplouke, louk
perseverepersevere
persuadekonvink
pickramase, ramas
pick upramase, ramas
pierceperse, pers
plantplante, plant

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 83
playzwe
pluckkase, kas
polishpoli
pourvide, vid
praypriye
precedepresede, presed
precipitatepresipite, presipit
precisepresize, presiz
prepareprepare, prepar
prescribepreskrir
preservepreserve, preserv
pretendfer samblan
preventprevenir
produceprodir
progressprogrese, progres
prohibitinterdi
promisepromet
protectproteze, protez
protestproteste, protest
proveprouve, prouv
providefourni
provokeagase, agas
pullrise, ris or tire, tir
pushpouse, pous
putmete, met
quantifymizire, mizir
quarrellager
querydemann
quitkite, kit
razeraze, raz
reach (a destination)arive, ariv
readlir
readypare
realiserealize, realiz
recallrapel
receiveresevwar
rechargeresarze
reclaimreklame, reklam
reclineinkline, inklin
recogniserekonet
recommendrekomande, rekomand
recordanrezistre, anrezistr
 recoverdegaze
reducediminie
reflectreflekte, reflekt
refuserefize, refiz
regretregrete, regret
relaxdekontrakte
remainreste, rest
rememberrapel
removetire, tir
rentlwe
repairrepare, repar
repeatrepete, repet
resembleresanble, resanbl
restrepoze, repoz
restrainanpese, anpes
returnretourne, retourn
rewardrekompanse, rekompans
rinserinse, rins
ripdesire, desir
rotatepivote
rubfrote, frot
ruinrwine, rwin
rungaloupe, galoup
rushdegaze, degaz
savesape, sap
save (to economise)ekonomize, ekonomiz
saydir
scarefer per
scratchgrate, grat
sealsele
searchrode, rod
seetrouve, trouv
seekrode, rod
seemparet
seizesezi
sellvande, vann
sendanvwaye, anvway or avoye, avoy
separatesepare, separ
settleetabli
sewkoud
shakesakouye, sakouy

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 84
sharepartaze, partaz
sharpenfite, fit
shatterkase, kass
shaveraze, raz
shinebriye
shoutkriye, kriy
showmontre
shutferme
singsante, sant
sitasize, asiz
slapkalot
sleepdormi
slideglise, glis
smilesourir
sneezeterne
snifsanti
solverezoud
sowseme
sparklebriye or glase
speakkoze, koz
specifyspesifie
spelleple
spenddepanse, depans
spit (out)crase, cras
splitfann
spoilgate, gat
sprayspre
spreadpropaze, propaz
squatakroupi
stabpwagnarde, pwagnard
standdeboute, debout
startkoumanse, koumans
stickkole, kol
stinksanti pi
stirdeleye, deley
stoparete, aret
straightendrese, dres or fer vin drwat
strollmars-marse
submergesibmerze
sucksouse, sous
suggestsigzere, sigzer
surroundantoure, antour
 swallowavale, aval
sweattranspire, transpir
sweepbalie
swimnaze, naz
swingbalanse, balans
takepran
tastegoute, gout
teachansegne, ansegn
teasesikane, sikann or takine, takinn
telldir
testteste, test
thankremersie
thinkpanse, pans
threatenmenase, menas
throwavoye, avoy or lanse, lans
tickmet enn rayt
tirefatige, fatig
tired (to become)touye, touy
touchtouse, tous
translatetradir
transplanttransplante, transplant
travelvwayaze, vwayaz
trembletranble
tricktrike
tumbletonbe, tom
turntourne, tourn
uncoverdekouver
understandkonpran
uniteinir
untiedefer
useservi
utterprononse, pronons
verifyverifie
vibratevibre
visitvizite, vizit
vomitvomi
waitatann
wait (for)espere, esper
wakeleve, lev
walkmarse, mars
wanderchake

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 85
wantanvi
warnaverti
washlave, lav
watchgete, get
wearmete, met
weepplore, plor
weighmezire, mezir or peze, pez
welcomeakeyir
whipfwete, fwet
whisperkoz dousman or mirmire, mirmir
whistlesifle
wingagne, gagn
wipesouyer
withdrawtire, tir
worktravay
wrapanbale, anbal
writeekrir
yawnbaye
Numbers and counting

numbernimero or nonb
oneenn
twode
threetrwa
fourkat
fivesink
sixsis
sevenset
eightwit
ninenef
tendis
elevenonz
twelvedouz
thirteentrez
fourteenkatorz
fifteenkinz
sixteensez
seventeendiset
eighteendizwit
 nineteendiznef
twentyvin
twenty-onevint-e-enn
twenty-twovennde
twenty-threevenntrwa
twenty-fourvennkat
twenty-fivevennsink
twenty-sixvennsis
twenty-sevenvennset
twenty-eightvintwit
twenty-ninevintnef
thirtytrant
fortykarannt
fiftysinkant
sixtyswasant
seventyswasanntdis
eightykatrovin
ninetykatrovin-dis
one hundredsan
one thousandmil
one millionenn milyon
  

firstpremie
seconddeziem
thirdtrwaziem
fourthkatiem
fifthsinkiem
sixthsisiem
seventhsetiem
eighthwitiem
ninthnefiem
tenthdisiem
Quantities

amountkantite
biggro
equalegal
evenegal or regilie
how (much/many)komie
muchboukou
multiplemiltip

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 86
numerousboukou
quantitykantite
quarterenn kar
ratetarif
sizelatay
smalltipti
Time and date

MondayLindi
TuesdayMardi
WednesdayMerkredi
ThursdayZedi
FridayVandredi
SaturdaySamdi
SundayDimans
 
wikennweekend
yesterdayyer
 
JanuaryZanvie
FebruaryFevriye
MarchMars
AprilAvril
MayMe
JuneZwin
JulyZilie
AugustOut
SeptemberSeptam
OctoberOktob
NovemberNovam
DecemberDesam
 
monthmwa
monthlymansiel
 
afternoonlapremidi
afternoon (late)tanto
anytimeninport kan
beforeavan
datedat
dawnlob
 dayzour
day (the)lizour
earlyboner
eveningaswar
immediatelydeswit or toutswit
latertaler
long (time)longtan
midnightminwi
minuteminit
momentletan or moman
morninggramatin
nightlanwit
noonmidi
nowaster-la
nowadayszordizour
oftensouvan
onceenn sel fwa
recentlyfek or resaman
soonbiento
timeler
todayzordi
tomorrowdemin or dime
weeklasemenn
yearlane
 People

anyoneninport ki sann-la
auntmatant
babybaba
boygarson
boyfriendkopin or pwinter
brotherfrer
brother-in-lawbofrer
childzenfan
childhoodlafans
cousinkouzin
daughtertifi
daughter-in-lawbelfi
fatherpapa
father-in-lawboper
femalefemel

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 87
fishermanpeser
girlfriendkopinn
grandchildti-zanfan
grandfathergranper
grandmothergranmer
grandparentsgranparan
grandsonti-zanfan
husbandmari or misie
ladymadam
lady (young)mamzel
malemal
mandimounn or zom
man (young)zennzan
mistermisie
mothermama
mother-in-lawbelmer
nephewneve
niecenies
nobodypersonn
nurseners
peopledimounn
persondimounn
relativefami
sisterser
sister-in-lawbelser
songarson
son-in-lawzann
teenageradolesan
teensladolesans
uncletonton
wifefam
womanfam
 Natural world

animalzanimo
birdzwazo
bulltoro
catsat
chickenpoul
cowvas
doglisien
duckkanar
 elephantlelefan
fishpwason
froggrenouy
goatkabri
mammalmamifer
monkeyzako
mousesouri
pigkoson
rabbitlapin
ratlera
sharkrekin
snakeserpan
tortoisetorti
whalelabalenn
  

antfourmi
beemous-dimiel
butterflypapiyon
centipedesanpie
insectbebet
ladybirdpoulbondie
mosquitomoustik
snailkourpa
spiderlaregne
wormlever
  

branchbrans
bushbwison
grasslerb
plantplant
treepie
weedmove lerb
  

summerlete
winterliver
  

breezelabriz
cloudniaz
cyclonesiklonn
dewlaroze
rainlapli
rainylapli / lapli
snowlanez

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 88
stormtanpet
thunderstormloraz
weatherklima
winddivan

coralkoray
earthlater
gravitygravite
moonlalinn
moon (full)plenn (linn)
naturelanatir
oceanlosean
skylesiel
sunsoley
universeliniver
worldlemond
worldwidemondial
 The body

abdomenabdomenn
anklesevi
armlebra
blooddisan
bodylecor
bonelezo
brainlaservel or servo
breathlesouf
cheeklazou
chesttorax or tors
chinmanton
diseasemaladi
dizzinessvertiz
dizzytourdi
earzorey
elbowkoud
eyelizie
eyebrowsoursi
eyelashsil
eyelidpopier
feetlipie
fingerledwa
gutlintestin
 hairseve
hammermarto
handlame
headlatet
heartleker
intestinelintestin
jawlamaswar
kidneylerin
kneezenou
lipslalev
liverlefwa
lungpoumon
mindlespri
moustachemoustas
mouthlabous
musclemisk
necklicou
nervener
nosenene
shoulderzepol
skeletonskelet
skinlapo
stomachlestoma
tendontandon
thighlakwis
throatlagorz
thumbpous
toeledwa lipie
tonguelalang
toothledan
veinlavenn
voicelavwa
waistlatay
wristpwagne
Around the house

bathroomsal-debin
bed sheetsdra
bedroomlasam
kitchenlakwizinn
rooftwa
roomlasam

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 89
sitting roomsalon
toilettwalet
wallmiray
wash roomtwalet
windowlafnet
yard/courtyardlakour
 
basketpanie
bathbin
bedlili
binpoubel
binocularszimel
blanketmolton
bookliv
bottleboutey
bowlbol
boxbwat
bucketseo
bulbglob
chairsez
clockrevey
cushionkousin
doorlaport
draindrin
drawertirwar
envelopelanvlop
glassver
glasses/spectacleslinet
handlepwagne
keylakle
knifekouto
mirrorlaglas or mirwar
ovenfour
pane (window)karo vit
pillowlorye
pinpinn
pin (safety)zepeng
plugpleg
poolpisinn
pot (flower)vaz
purseportmone
refrigeratorfrizider
scissorssizo
 screwvis
screwdrivertournavis
showerdous
sinklevie
spadelapel
spoonkouyer
stairsleskalie
suitcasevaliz
tablelatab
telephonetelefonn
televisiontelevizion
toilettwalet
towelserviet
tweezerspins
umbrellaparasol
wardrobelarmwar
wash basinlavabo
watch (wrist)mont
wiredifil
 Food and drink

breaddipin
cakegato
cheesefromaz
dessertdeser
eggdizef
olivezoliv
omeletteomlet
onionzwayon
pepperdipwav
potatopomdeter
ricediri
souplasoup
tomatotomat
vanillalavani
 
applepom
bananabanann
graperezin
melonmelon
orangezoranz

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 90
peachpes
pineapplezanana
watermelonmelondo
 
beerlabier
coffeekafe
juicezi
milkdile
teadite
waterdelo
winedivin
Clothes

beltsintir
buttonbouton
coatpalto
dressrob
glovelegan
pocketpoz
pyjamaspizama
shirtsemiz
shoesoulie
skirtzip
socksoset
sweaterpoulover or triko
trouserspantalon
 Colours  
colourkouler
 
blacknwar
blueble
brownmaron
greenver
greygri
orangezoranz
pinkroz
purpleviolet
redrouz
whiteblan
 yellowzonn
Finding your way

leftgos
nearpre
northlenor
outdooran-plener
outsidedeor
rightdrwat
southlesid
therela
underneathanba
westlwes
Places

gatelantre
groundlater
hospitallopital
marketbazar
mountainmontagn
overlor
overseaslot pei
placeplas
sealamer
spacelespas
townlavil
villagevilaz
 Measurements

centimetresantimet
footpie
inchpous
kilometrekilomet
metremet
milemil
millimetremilimet

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 91Other general vocabulary

abilitykapasite
absenceabsans or labsans
absentabsan
absolutelyabsoliman
accidentaksidan
advantagelavantaz
advicekonsey
agreedakor
agreementlakor
airler
alcohollalkol
alikeparey
alltou
alonetousel
alreadydeza
alwaystouzour
amazementetonnman
amusementlamizman
anglelang
angryankoler
answerrepons
anythingninport ki zafer
appointmentrandevou
approvallakor
badmove
bagsak
balancebalans
basinkivet
beautifulzoli
becauseakoz or parski
behaviourkonportman
beliefkrwayans
bendkontour
benefitlavantaz
bettermeyer
bicyclebisiklet
birthnesans
blameblam
blindaveg
blindnessavegleman
blowkou
 blurflou
boatbato
bosspatron
brickblok
bridgepon
brightvif
brushbros
bursteklatman
businessbizness
butme
canekann
capkap or kasket
cardkart
carefulfer attension
carelessfoupamal
castkast
castlesato
cautionprekosion
cautiouspridan
cavelakav
celebrationselebrasion
centresant
chainlasenn
chalklakre
chancesans
charmsarm
chaselasas
cheapbomarse
cheatervoler
chemicalsimik
choiceswa
churchlegliz
circleserk
citysite
claimreklamation
cleanprop
clearkler
climateklima
close (to someone)proz avec
clothlatwal
clumsymaladrwa
coldfre
cold (a)lagrip

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 92
complaintkonplint
completelykonpletman
confusekonfizion
connectionkoneksion
consciouskonsian
cook (a)kwizinie
cordlakord
correctexakt
correctionkoreksion
couplekoup
coverkouvertir
crazyfou
creationkreasion
creditkredi or merit
crimekrim
crowdlafoul
cruelkriel
cuptas
currentkouran
curvekontour
damagedomaz
dampmwat or imid
dancedans
dangerdanze
dangerousdanzere
darknwar
deadmor
deafsourd
deathlamor
debtdet
decisiondesizion
decorationdekorasion
decorativedekoratif
deeplyprofondeman
defencedefans
defensivedefansi
degreedegre
deliberatelyexpreseman
delicatefrazil
deliciousbon
deliverylivrezon
demonstrationdemonstrasion
dependencydepandans
 dependentdepandan
depositdepo or depozit
desiredezir
detaildetay
developmentdevlopman
differencediferans
differentdiferan
difficultdifisil
difficultydifikilte
directdirek
directlydirekteman
dirtsalte
dirtysal
disadvantagedezavantaz
discoverydekouver or trouvay
discussiondiskision
disorderdezord
disorderlyan dezord
distancedistans
distantdistan or lwin
distributiondistribision
doctordokter
doubtdout
drawingdesin
dreamrev
drink (a)bwason
dropgout
drysek
duplicatekopi
eachsak
easilyfasilman
easyfasil
economicalekonomik
economylekonomi
edgebor or rebor
educationledikasion
effectlefe
effectiveefektif
effectivenesslefikasite
electricelektrik
electricianelektrisien
electricitykouran
embarrassmentlanbara

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 93
encouragementlankourazman
endlafin
enginemoter
EnglishAngle
enoughase
environmentlanvironnman
equipmentlekipman
errorerer
eventevennman
everdezavantaz
everysak
evidenceprev
exactexak
exaggerationexazerasion
examplelexanp
exceptexsepte
exceptionexsepsion
excessanplis
exchangeesanz
existencelexistans
exitsorti
expensiveser
extremelyextra or mari
fashionlamod
fishinglapes
flightvol
gamezwe
giftkado
girltifi
giverdoner
goldlor
goldendore
goodbon
greatgran or top
griefsagrin
howkouma
howeverselman
hungerfin
hungrygagn fin
jealouszalou
jealousyzalouzi
journeyvwayaz
justzis
 kickkout or pie
kindbon
knotne
knowledgekonesans
letterlet
liemanti
like (this or that)kouma
machinemasinn
mailkourye
mainprinsipal
mainlyprinsipalman
marriagemaryaz
marriedmarye
may (be able to)kapav
maybekitfwa
meanvedir
meaningsinifikasion
meatlaviann
medicinemedsinn
meetingreunion
mercypitie
messdezord
messagemesaz
methodmetod
middlemilie
milemil
minepou mwa
miniatureminiatir
minimumminimum
miserablemalere or miserab
mistakefot
mostlaplipar
mostlysirtou
motionmouvman
motorbikemoto
mouldymwazi
mouldy (to go)gagn mwazi
movementmouvman
muddledezord
musiclamizik
mustbizin or neseser or obligatwar
mymo bann

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 94
myselfmomem or mwa
namenom
narrowmins or retresi or sere
naturalnatirel
naturallynatirelman
naughtymove
neatan-ord or prop
neatlyan-ord
necessaryneseser
necessitynesesite
needlebezwin
negativenegatif
nerve (courage)kouraz
nervestrak
nervousnerve
newnef or nouvo
newspaperzournal
nextprosin or swivan
niceagreab or bon or zoli
nonon
noisetapaz
noisyki fer tapaz
noneokenn
nonsenseninport
normalnormal
nostriltrou-nene
nothingnanye
nuisancenwizans
numbangourdi
nutrientaliman nitritif
objectkiksoz or l’obze
observationlobzervasion
obstacleobstak
obstructionobstriksion
obviousevidan
occasionlokazion
oddbizar
odourloder
off (switch)tengn
offenceofans
offensiveofansif
offerlof or of
officebiro
 officialofisiel
officiallyofisielman
oildelwil
oldvie
onlor
oneselflimem
onlyzis
openouver
openingouvertir
openlyouvertman
opportunityloportinite
opposite (of)kontrer
optionopsion
orouswa or swa
ordinaryordiner
organisationlorganizasion
organiserorganizateur
originalorizinal
otherlot
ournou or pou nou
outdeor
outsideretranze
ovaloval
owedwa
ownerproprieter
oxygenloxizenn
packetpake
pagepaz
paindouler
painfulpenib
paintlapintir
pairper
palepal
panelpano
panicpanik
paperpapie
paradiseparadi
paragraphparagraf
parallelparalel
parentparan
partpar
part (of)an parti
particularpartikilie

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 95
partitionklwazon or partision
partyfet
passagepasaz
passengerpasaze
passportpaspor
pastlepase
pathsantie or semin or sime
patiencepatians
patternpatern
pausepoz or silans
pavementtrotwar
pawlapat
paymentpeyman
peacelape
peacefulkalm or trankil
pearpwar
pedestrianpieton
pegpins
penplim
pencilkreyon
pencil caseplimie
pencil sharpenerfitwar
perfectparfe
perfumeparfime
perhapskapav
pestermanz lavi
phone (mobile)portab
photofoto
picturetablo
piecemorso
pileenn ta
pitypitie
planplan
planeavion
plasterplak
plasticplastik
platepla
platformlestrad
pleasantagreab
please (formal)silvouple
please (informal)silteple
pleasureplezir
plierspins
 pointpwin
poisonpwazon
polepolone
policelapolis
poorpov
portionporsion
positionpozision
possessionposesion
possibleposib
postlapos
post (job role)(plas) travay
powderlapoud
powerpouvwar
praiseeloz
prayerlapriyer
precisepresi
preparationpreparasion
prescriptionlordonans
presenceprezans
present (timeframe)prezan
presslapres
pricepri
pridefierte
prioritypriorite
privateprive
problemproblem
procedureprosedir
processprosesis
profitprofi
propertypropriete
protectionproteksion
publicpiblik
publicitypiblisite or reklam
punchkoudpwin
purepir
puritypirte
purplemov
purposelintansion
qualificationkalifikasion
qualitykalite
quarrelbagar
questionkestion
queuelake

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 96
quickrapid
quicklyvit
quiettrankil
racelekours
radioradio
ragsinfon
ragelaraz
rather (than)plito
rawkri
razorrazwar
reactionreaksion
reasonla rezon
reasoningrezonnman
receiptresi
recentresan
recoveryretablisman
reformreform
regularregilie
releaseliberasion
religionrelizion
requestreket
respectrespe
respectablerespektab
responsibleresponsab
rhythmritm
ribkot
richris
ringbag
riverlarivier
riverbankbor larivier
roadsemin or sime
rockros
ropelakord
roughbrouyon
roundron
rubbishsalte
rudemalelve
ruinlarwinn
rustlarouy
sadtris
safetysekirite
saltdisel
sameparey
 sanddisab
saucelasos
schoollekol
sciencesians
screenlekran
seatsiez
secretsekre
selectionseleksion
selfmwa
seriousserye
shamelaont
shapeform
sharpfite
shelfletazer
shellkoki
shinybriyan
shiverfrison
shocksok
shoplaboutik
shortkourt
sickmalad
sicknessmaladi
sidekote
sievetaminn
sighsoupir
signsign
signaturesignatir
silencesilans
silenttrankil
silverlarzan
simplesimp
sinceresinser
sinceritysinserite
sipti-gorze
slicetrans
slimmins
slopelapant
slowdousman
smartelegan
smellloder
smokelafime
smoothlis
soapsavon

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 97
softmol or mou
solesemel
solidsolid
solublesolib
somethingzafer
songsante
sortespes
soullespri
soundson
soureg
specialspesial
speechdiskour
spiritlespri
spongeleponz
sportspor
spottas
springprintan
squarekare
starzetwal
steamvaper
steellasie
steppa
stickykolan
stiffred
stillankor
stoneros
storyzistwar
straightdrwat
strangeetranz
strangeretranze
streetlari
strongfor
structurestriktir
studentetidian
stupidkouyon
substancesibstans
suddenenn kout
sugardisik
suggestionsizestion
superbsiper
surelysirman
surprisesirpriz
sweetdou
 talkkozri
talllong
tastybon
teacherprofeser
teamlekip
tearlarm
teethledan
temperkarakter
temperaturetanperatir
tendencytandans
thatsa
that (is what)seki
theatreteat
theoryteori
thickepe
thicknesslepeser
thiefvoler
thinmins
thingkiksoz
thirstlaswaf or swaf
thirstygagn swaf
thissa
threatmenas
throughatraver
tick (a)rayt
tickettiket
tidyan-ord
tightsere
tinbwat konserv
tinyminiskil
tipbout
tirelarou
tiredfatige
tirednesslafatigue
togetheransam
toolzouti
topsome
torchtors
toughdir
traintrin
transporttranspor
trappieze
trashsalte

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol 98
trayplato
treasurytrezor
tricktrik
tripexkirsion
troubleproblem
truevre
trustkonfians
truthverite
tryseye, sey
typetip
uglyvilin
ultimatefinal
unbalancedezekilibre
uncomfortableinfonfortab
unluckymalsanse
unsureinsertin
untidyan dezord
untilziska
upside-downanba-lao
usefulitil
usualabitiel
utilityitilite
validityvalidite
valuevaler
vapourlavaper
variantvaryant
variationvaryasion
varietyvaryete
variousboukou or diferan
verticalvertikal
vestzile
visionvi
visitorviziter
voyagevwayaz
wagelapey
warlager
warmtied
wavevag
weakfeb
weaknessfebles
wealthrises
weddingmaryaz
weightpwa
 weirdbizar
wellbien
well-knownrenome
wetmouye
whatki
wheellarou
wheelbarrowbouret
whenkan
wherekot
whoki
who (direct question)ki sann-la
whykifer
widelarz
wildsovaz
winglezel
wisesaz
wishve
withar or avek or ek
withoutsan
wooddibwa
woodenan dibwa
woollalenn
wordmo
workertravayer
wrapperanbalaz
wrongpa bon
yeswi
youngzenn
youthzenes

EnglishEnglishKreolKreol